The Project Gutenberg eBook of A song-bird
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A song-bird


Author: Eleanora H. Stooke

Illustrator: Alfred Pearse

Release date: December 1, 2023 [eBook #72274]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society, 1908


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SONG-BIRD ***
Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.

[Illustration: "YOU ARE NOT AFRAID OF MY DOG?"]



                             A SONG-BIRD


                                  BY

                          ELEANORA H. STOOKE


         Author of "Angel's Brother," "Little Maid Marigold,"
                 "The Bottom of the Bread Pan," etc.



                 WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ALFRED PEARSE



                               LONDON
                     THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
         4 BOUVERIE STREET AND 65 ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD E.C.



                             CONTENTS

CHAPTER

   I. MAVIS AND HER MOTHER

  II. CONCERNING MISS DAWSON

 III. THE ARRIVAL AT THE MILL HOUSE

  IV. MRS. GREY'S DEPARTURE

   V. PETTY JEALOUSY

  VI. ROSE IN TROUBLE

 VII. A GREAT GIFT

VIII. LOOKING FORWARD TO CHRISTMAS

  IX. CHRISTMAS TIME

   X. SICKNESS AT THE MILL HOUSE

  XI. HAPPY DAYS


                           A SONG-BIRD

CHAPTER I

MAVIS AND HER MOTHER

"THERE, I've finished. How the days are drawing in, to be sure! I
declare it's getting dark already, though it's only six o'clock."

The scene was an upstairs sitting-room in a dingy London lodging-house,
on a September evening. And the speaker—Mrs. Grey—rose from her seat at
the table as she spoke, and laid aside her writing materials with an
air of relief, afterwards placing the letter, over the composition of
which she had spent fully half an hour, on the mantelpiece. She then
took an easy-chair by the window, whilst the other occupant of the
room—her little daughter, Mavis, who had been watching the passers-by
in the street—settled herself on a stool at her feet.

"Now we can have a nice chat, mother," Mavis said. "I've been longing
to talk, but I haven't liked to disturb you. You've been writing a very
particular letter, haven't you?"

"Yes, dear; but how did you guess that?"

"You looked so grave, and, I thought, sad. There's nothing very much
amiss, is there, mother? Are you worrying because you haven't had any
nursing to do lately? We've money left to go on with, haven't we?"

Mavis was a pretty little girl of ten years, with beautiful hazel eyes,
and a quantity of soft brown hair which curled naturally and could
never be kept tidy. Her expression was one of great anxiety, as she
looked up into her mother's face and waited for her response.

Mrs. Grey did not answer immediately. She was a tall, handsome woman,
with a self-reliant manner, and a countenance which inspired trust. She
had been left a widow several years previously, since when she had had
a hard battle to fight. For her husband, who had held a curacy in the
East End of London, had had no private means, and at his death she had
found herself nearly penniless.

Before her marriage, however, she had been fully qualified as a nurse,
so she had taken up her old profession again, and had earned sufficient
by private nursing to support herself and her child. Of late, she had
been out of work, and things had looked dark altogether; but she owned
a brave heart and was not easily cast down. So that it had been with
awe as well as with surprise, that Mavis had observed her shedding
tears over the letter she had been writing.

"As a matter of fact, we've very little money left," Mrs. Grey
admitted, at length. "But I'm not troubled about that now, for I
have been asked and have engaged to nurse a rich young lady who
is threatened with consumption, and—and it is likely to be a long
engagement."

"Oh, mother! You said you felt sure God would provide for us, and you
were right. Who is the young lady? Does she live near here? Will you be
away at night? How shall you manage?"

On previous occasions, when Mrs. Grey had been absent, Mavis had
boarded with the lodging-house keeper, Miss Tompkins. And she thought
very likely it would be arranged for her to do so again. She would have
no objection to raise to the plan, for Miss Tompkins, a kind-hearted,
elderly spinster, who had seen better days, was a great favourite of
hers.

"I-I hardly know," Mrs. Grey answered, somewhat hesitatingly. "I don't
like the idea of being separated from you, child, but I feel it must
be."

"Oh, I shall be all right, mother!" Mavis declared, reassuringly.

"You don't understand, dear; I must explain. Miss Dawson—the young lady
I have engaged to nurse—is the only child of a very rich man, and I do
not think my duties will be arduous, but—but I shall have to go abroad
with her—to Australia."

"To Australia!" echoed Mavis, aghast, the colour fading from her
'cheeks, a look of dismay in her hazel eyes. "Why, Australia's ever so
far away—right at the other side of the world!"

"Yes. I shall be gone months, perhaps even a year or longer, it will
depend upon the patient."

"Oh, mother," gasped Mavis, "you don't mean it! Say you don't."

"But I do mean it, my dear. I am to have a splendid salary, and shall
be able to provide for you well during my absence. It would have been
madness to have refused this post. Suppose nothing else offered? Then
we should be face to face with want, and with the winter coming on,
too. Don't look at me so reproachfully, Mavis."

"Mother, how can you leave me?" cried the little girl. "I don't mind
living with Miss Tompkins for a few weeks, but for months, perhaps
years—" She completed the sentence with a sob.

"It is not my intention to leave you with Miss Tompkins, my dear. I
am thinking of sending you to your father's relations, if they will
have you, and I expect they will. You know you've an uncle and aunt
living at W—, near Oxford, and they have children about your age, a
girl and a boy. Wouldn't you like to know them? I've written to your
uncle to-night. You remember him, don't you? He came to your father's
funeral, and once afterwards, he called to see us, when he was in town
on business."

"Yes," replied Mavis, dolefully. She had a somewhat hazy remembrance of
a tall, stout man, with stooping shoulders, who had presented her with
a big box of chocolates. She had the box still, it was one of her few
treasures.

"He is a miller at W—, and is a very prosperous man, I believe. I have
written to ask him to take you into his home, and I am sure he will.
Come, my dear, don't cry. We ought to be very, very thankful that I
have succeeded in obtaining such a good post."

In spite of her brave words, there were tears in Mrs. Grey's own eyes
as she spoke. Her little daughter leaned against her knees and wept
heart-brokenly, and she smoothed her tangled brown locks with a gentle,
caressing hand.

Mavis knew by experience, that when her mother had quite made up her
mind that a certain course of action was right, she would certainly
pursue it. So by-and-by, she dried her eyes and tried to compose
herself, but her heart was dreadfully sore. Mrs. Grey went on to
explain that Miss Dawson was very young—only seventeen—and that the
doctors hoped the long voyage and a few months' sojourn in Australia
might do much for her health.

"I am very, very sorry for her, for she is terribly delicate," she
said, pityingly. "She is motherless, too, poor girl! Her father has
business engagements to keep him in England, or he would make the trip
to Australia with her, himself. She will be completely in my charge,
so mine will be a responsible position. It is very sad to see one so
young, so weak and ill. Don't you feel sorry for her, Mavis?"

"Yes, of course I do," Mavis answered.

Then she added, with a touch of jealousy in her tone, "She will have
you all to herself; but you won't forget your own little girl, will
you?"

"Do you think that is likely?" Mrs. Grey asked, seriously.

"No, mother, indeed I don't," Mavis replied, feeling rather ashamed of
herself; "but it is so very hard that we should be parted."

"It does appear so, dear; but, depend upon it, God knows best. You
don't realize how worried I've been lately, wondering how we should
manage, if I didn't get an engagement soon. Of course, I ought not to
have felt like that. I ought to have remembered that 'sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof.' And now it seems to me, that this work is
the answer to my prayers, and that therefore it is the work God wishes
me to do. It has come like light in darkness, and I want you to rejoice
with me. Come, little song-bird, it grieves me to look at your gloomy
face; let me see you smile."

Mavis tried to obey, but it was a sorry attempt. Her dead father
had chosen her somewhat fanciful name, and it suited her well. For
she was the possessor of a voice as sweet and clear as the bird—the
song-thrush—after which she had been named. She was a healthy, bright,
happy child who had never had a real trouble in her life till now. She
remembered her father quite well, but he had died when she had been too
young to realize her loss. She had certainly cried when, on inquiring
for him, she had been told he had gone a long journey to a far country.
But she had soon dried her eyes, and been consoled by the assurance
that if she was a good girl, she would go to him some day.

Mavis had never thought much about her relatives. She knew her mother
was an orphan who had been brought up at a charitable institution. And
she had frequently heard her remark that she did not think she had any
one near akin to her in the world, and that, but for her husband's
brother, who wrote to her very kindly from time to time, there was no
one to whom she could go for assistance or advice.

Now, as she sat at her mother's feet and tried to reconcile herself to
the parting which seemed inevitable, the little girl reflected that it
would be rather nice to have companions of her own age, and that it
would be pleasant to live in the country. By-and-by, she looked up with
a smile, and her mother saw that she meant to make the best of things.

"That's right, my dear," Mrs. Grey said cordially, "you're my sensible
little daughter again, I see. We shall not be separated quite yet—"

"When will it be, mother?" Mavis broke in.

"In about a fortnight, I think. Mr. Dawson asked me if I could be
ready by then, and I told him I could. Of course, if your uncle and
aunt decline to have you at W—, I must arrange for you to remain with
Miss Tompkins, but I would rather leave you with relatives. I've
never been to W—, but I believe it's a very pretty place; the nearest
railway-station is Oxford. Perhaps I may take you to W— myself."

"Oh, mother, I hope you will."

"We shall see."

Mrs. Grey rose as she spoke, lit the gas, and pulled down the blind.
Then she took up the letter she had written, and remarked, "It may as
well go to-night. I will put on my bonnet and cloak and post it. You
may come with me, if you like, Mavis, and we will have a look at the
shops."

"Oh yes," Mavis agreed, readily.

Accordingly, mother and daughter went out together. Mrs. Grey posted
her letter at the first pillar-box they passed. And a few minutes
later, they turned from the dingy street in which their home was
situated, into a wider thoroughfare lined on either side with fine
shops, brilliantly illuminated with electric light.

Mavis amused herself, for a while, by pointing out to her mother the
various articles she would like to buy, and it did not trouble her that
she could not purchase any of them, for she was a contented little soul
who had never fretted at poverty. But by-and-by, she grew silent, and
her interest in her surroundings commenced to flag.

"Shall we go home, now?" suggested Mrs. Grey, thinking the child was
getting tired.

"Yes, if you like, mother," Mavis answered, in a dispirited tone.

She did not explain that she had become suddenly depressed by the
thought that she and her mother might never thus gaze into the shop
windows together again. Who could tell what might happen in the months
to come? Her mother might be shipwrecked and drowned. Oh, there were
scores of accidents which might happen to prevent her return. A panic
of fear, such as she had never experienced before, had taken possession
of her. But she kept her self-control until she went to bed and her
mother came to kiss her good night. Then, as she felt the clasp of her
mother's loving arms, she broke into tears and wailed piteously.

"Oh, don't, don't leave me! Don't go to Australia! What shall I
do without you? Oh, mother, I've only you—only you! Oh, I feel so
frightened!"

"Hush, hush, dear," Mrs. Grey whispered tenderly, as she pressed the
little quivering form to her breast. "You must not be frightened. You
must trust in God, and never forget that if I am far away from you, He
will be always near—caring for you, protecting you, and loving you all
the time. Jesus said, 'Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid.' Often we can't help being troubled and fearful, but if we
had more faith in our Saviour, we should never be either. The thought
of separation is as distressing to me as it is to you, Mavis, but I
believe God has willed it for the good of both of us. Won't you try to
believe it, too?"

"Indeed I will try," Mavis returned, checking her sobs. "I want to be
brave, for I know it hurts you to see me like this, mother. But, oh, I
never once dreamed you would go away from me—so far, far away, right to
the other side of the world!"



CHAPTER II

CONCERNING MISS DAWSON

MRS. GREY received a letter from her brother-in-law by return of post,
in which, as she had anticipated would be the case, he expressed his
willingness to make a home for Mavis for as long as she should need it.

"My wife bids me say she will do her best for your little girl," he
wrote, "and I am sure she will not be lonely with Rose and Bob for
playfellows. Bob goes to the village school; but Rose attends a private
school for girls, kept by a Miss Matthews, and I suggest that Mavis
should accompany her. Why not come and spend a few days with Mavis at
W— before you leave England? It would give us much pleasure to welcome
you to the Mill House."

"I should like to go," Mrs. Grey said, smiling at her little daughter,
to whom she had been reading extracts from her brother-in-law's letter,
"and I will try to manage it. I think I must go and see Miss Dawson
to-day, and ascertain if her father has decided by which vessel she is
to travel. Would you like to accompany me—to Camden Square, I mean,
where the Dawsons live?"

"Indeed I should, mother," Mavis answered.

"I have told Miss Dawson about you, and she expressed a desire to see
you. I think she will like to talk to you, Mavis, and you must try not
to be shy with her, for she is little more than a child herself. She is
exceedingly low-spirited at the prospect of leaving her father, to whom
she is most devotedly attached."

"She's very rich, didn't you say, mother?" said Mavis.

"Rich as far as money goes, but she cannot enjoy life, like most girls
of her age, because she is in such poor health."

"I suppose she'll get well, won't she?"

"I cannot say, my dear. God alone knows that."

Mavis' interest in Miss Dawson was increasing, and she was now all
eagerness to see her. She and her mother started for Camden Square
shortly after their midday dinner, but it was nearly four o'clock by
the time they reached their destination.

Never before had the little girl been in such a luxuriously furnished
house as Mr. Dawson's, and she made good use of her eyes as she crossed
the hall in the wake of the servant who ushered her mother and herself
into a large, lofty drawing-room. How soft was the thick velvet pile
carpet, with its pattern of moss and pale pink rosebuds! It was almost
too handsome to step on, Mavis thought, and she looked at her boots
anxiously, to make sure they were not muddy.

"Oh, mother, this is a lovely room," she whispered as the servant, who
had informed them that her master was not at home, but that he was
expected shortly, went to tell Miss Dawson of their arrival; "but if
it was mine I should be afraid to use it, I am sure. It is far, far
handsomer than Miss Tompkins' front drawing-room."

Miss Tompkins' front drawing-room, which that worthy lady let at half
a guinea a week, had hitherto been Mavis' idea of what a drawing-room
should be, but now she relegated it to a second place in her estimation.

In a very short while, the servant returned, and said that Miss Dawson
was ready to receive them, and they were shown upstairs. The servant
drew back a heavy crimson plush curtain hanging before a door which she
opened, and announced—"Mrs. Grey, if you please, Miss Laura."

"I'm so glad to see you've brought your little girl with you, Mrs.
Grey," said a soft musical voice. "How do you do? It's rather chilly,
isn't it? At least, I find it so."

Mavis looked at the speaker with an interest she did not strive to
conceal. Miss Dawson lay on a sofa, but she certainly did not appear
ill to an inexperienced observer, for there was a beautiful flush in
her cheeks, and her blue eyes were extremely brilliant. Mrs. Grey would
not permit her to rise, but drew a chair near to her sofa, and, having
duly introduced Mavis to her, questioned her concerning her health.

"Oh, I don't believe I'm half so bad as the doctors try to make out,"
the young girl declared, "and I wouldn't consent to go to Australia but
for father. He was so unhappy when, at first, I refused to go. And you,
you poor little thing," she proceeded, turning her attention to Mavis,
"you greatly dislike the idea of parting from your mother, do you not?"

"Yes," Mavis was obliged to admit.

"How you must hate me, because I'm going to be the cause of your
separation! But, since the doctors are bent on exiling me from England,
I'm glad your mother is going with me, because—Oh, come in!" she cried,
as there was a tap at the door.

It was the servant who had shown Mavis and her mother upstairs, come to
say that Mr. Dawson had returned, and would like to see Mrs. Grey.

"There, now everything will be settled," Miss Dawson remarked, as Mrs.
Grey left the room. "I consider you and I are companions in misfortune,
in one way, for you are to be separated from your mother and I from my
father. It's a great nuisance my lungs are so delicate."

"I am very sorry," Mavis said gently.

"But I won't believe that I am very bad; sometimes I don't feel ill at
all. Where are you going to live whilst your mother is away?"

Mavis told her, adding that she did not know her aunt and cousins, and
that she would miss her mother dreadfully. Her brown eyes filled with
tears as she spoke.

"Poor little thing!" murmured Miss Dawson, in a tone of such deep
sympathy, that the tears overflowed and ran down her companion's
cheeks. "I have no doubt you begrudge your mother to me," she
continued, after a brief pause, "but please do try not to. I really am
ill, you know, though I like to pretend I'm not sometimes, and—by the
way, you have not told me your name?"

"It is Mavis."

"Mavis?"

"Yes. My father chose it for me. A mavis is a thrush—a bird which
sings."

"And do you sing?" Miss Dawson inquired, with a smile.

"Yes," Mavis replied, drying her eyes and smiling too. "I used to sing
when I was quite a little girl."

Miss Dawson laughed; but the laugh brought on a fit of coughing which
lasted several minutes. When it had passed, she seemed quite exhausted,
and lay back on the sofa with her eyes shut, panting. Mavis was rather
frightened, and wished her mother would return, but presently Miss
Dawson opened her eyes and smiled at her, remarking apologetically—

"I hope I have not alarmed you; this wretched cough takes all my
strength away. There, I'm all right again. I wish you would sing to me."

"Do you mean now?" Mavis inquired, dubiously.

"Yes, unless you would rather not."

The little girl coloured nervously; but she feared to appear
disobliging, so she sang one or two simple ditties very prettily. Miss
Dawson was charmed, and Mavis felt gratified at being able to give her
pleasure.

"You have a very sweet voice," Miss Dawson said by-and-by, at the
conclusion of the last song. "Do—please do sing something more."

"I'm afraid I don't know any more songs," Mavis replied, "but I will
sing a hymn, if you like. I know! I will give you mother's favourite
psalm."

She commenced forthwith to sing an old version of the twenty-third
psalm—

   "The Lord is only my support, and He that doth me feed;
    How can I then lack anything whereof I stand in need?
    In pastures green He feedeth me, where I do safely lie;
    And after leads me to the streams which run most pleasantly."

   "And when I find myself near lost, then doth He me home take;
    Conducting me in His right paths, e'en for His own Name's sake.
    And though I were e'en at death's door, yet would I fear no ill;
    For both Thy rod and shepherd's crook afford me comfort still."

   "Thou hast my table richly spread in presence of my foe,
    Thou hast my head with balm refresht, my cup doth overflow—"

Mavis stopped suddenly, for, much to her consternation, she saw that
Miss Dawson was struggling to subdue an emotion which threatened to
overpower her, and that her blue eyes were swimming in tears. There was
silence for a few minutes.

"I am very foolish," the sick girl said, at length, in a tremulous
tone, "and you mustn't think I don't like your singing, for I do,
especially that psalm, it's—it's so comforting—"

   "And when I find myself near lost, then doth He me home take."

"I shall think of that when I'm ever so far away from England, and—and
I shall try to fear no ill, and remember that the Good Shepherd is
with me. I am so glad you came with your mother to-day, Mavis; I would
not have missed knowing you for a great deal. You must come to see me
again."

Mavis, immensely flattered, flushed rosy red. After that, they talked
quite confidentially, until Mrs. Grey re-entered the room. Miss Dawson
told her in what manner Mavis had been entertaining her, and that her
company had done her a vast deal of good.

"I must see more of her," she declared.

Then, with a sudden change of tone, she asked anxiously, "What has been
decided?"

"That we are to sail from Plymouth, by the 'Nineveh,' on Thursday
week," Mrs. Grey replied. "So we have only a short while in which to
make our final arrangements. I am afraid I shall have no opportunity of
bringing Mavis to see you again."

"Oh, mother!" cried Mavis, regretfully.

"I am sorry," said Miss Dawson, with a disappointed sigh. She took a
fine gold chain, from which was suspended a little heart-shaped locket,
from her neck as she spoke and called Mavis to her. "There, dear," she
said, as she clasped the chain around the little girl's neck, "I give
you that as a keepsake, for I want you to remember me, and—pray for me.
You need not mind taking it, for I bought it with my own money."

"Oh!" cried Mavis, delightedly. "Oh, how kind of you! Mother, may I
have it? Yes. Oh, thank you, thank you!" She threw her arms around Miss
Dawson's neck and kissed her warmly. "I shall never forget you," she
proceeded, her voice very earnest; "and I will pray for you, be very
sure of that. I hope you will soon get quite, quite well, and come home
again. Mother will take great care of you; she really is a capital
nurse. Oh, she is ready to go, and I must say good-bye."

"Good-bye," Miss Dawson said, with a bright smile. "We shall meet again
some day. I am glad you like the locket and chain."

"How I wish I had something to give you!" Mavis exclaimed.

"You have given me a great deal," Miss Dawson replied, in a low tone.

Then, as Mavis regarded her with wondering, questioning eyes, she said,
"You have given me comfort, and reminded me that I am not setting out
on a long journey without support from God. I shall remember that,
I hope, now, and I'd nearly forgotten it. Good-bye, Mavis—little
song-bird."

"Good-bye," Mavis responded, quite huskily.

She was surprised that she should feel so sad at saying good-bye to
one who had been a stranger to her a short hour before; but it was so,
and her eyes were dim with unshed tears as she followed her mother out
of the room. In the hall, they met Mr. Dawson—a gentleman with rather
an anxious-looking face—who spoke to Mavis very kindly and accompanied
them to the door, where his private carriage was waiting to take them
home.

"Remember Thursday week," he said impressively, as he closed the
carriage door upon Mrs. Grey and Mavis.

Then he stood back, and the carriage moved off.

"Oh, mother!" cried Mavis. "Thursday week! And it's Tuesday now! Oh, it
will be dreadfully soon!"



CHAPTER III

THE ARRIVAL AT THE MILL HOUSE

IT was a fine afternoon at the end of September, on one of those golden
days which frequently come when summer is ended, and the Mill House
at W— was looking its best. It was an old stone house, close to the
river, with lattice windows, around which creepers, now gorgeous with
autumn's brilliant colouring, crept and twined whilst over the porch,
which faced the southwest, clambered a monthly rose, on which a few
pink blossoms bloomed, though it was so late in the season. Before the
house was a well-kept plot of grass, surrounded by flower-beds and
intersected by the path which led to the wicket-gate in the privet
hedge which separated the garden from the high-road. And at the back
of the house was a large yard, and a kitchen-garden reaching to the
river's brink.

The mill wheel was silent on this perfect autumn afternoon, as it
usually was on Saturday afternoons, and everything was very still
within the house, where all was in apple-pie order. For visitors were
expected, and a substantial meal was awaiting them in the parlour.
Whilst in the kitchen, the kettle was singing merrily, and Jane, the
capable middle-aged maid-of-all-work, in a spotless gown and clean cap
and apron, was moving noiselessly about, duster in hand, in search of a
speck of dust which might have escaped her notice.

"Everything's as clean as a new pin, and so it ought to be, seeing
how I've slaved this day," she mused, her eyes wandering over the
well-scrubbed table, the various shining tin and copper articles on the
mantelpiece, and resting at length on the tall brass-faced clock which
stood near the door. "Half-past four!" she exclaimed. "They ought to be
here by this time."

She opened the door as she spoke, and walked along a dark, narrow
passage which led her into a stone-paved hall, flooded with sunshine
which found entrance through a window at the right of the front
door. Outside the front door, beneath the porch, stood a very little
woman—the Mistress of the Mill House—shading her eyes with her hand,
as she looked for the expected approach of a vehicle on the road which
stretched before the house and led to Oxford.

"Are they coming, ma'am?" Jane inquired, as she crossed the hall and
joined her mistress.

"The gig is not in sight yet," replied Mrs. Grey—or Mrs. John Grey, as
we must call her, to distinguish her from Mavis' mother. In fact, she
was generally known as Mrs. John.

"The children are outside the gate; they are as excited as they usually
are when we expect any one. I wonder what our visitors will be like.
I don't think Mrs. Grey can have much heart, or she wouldn't have
accepted this engagement to go to Australia. I know I could not endure
to be parted from my children—and she has only one child. John has
asked her to visit us on several occasions, but she has always found an
excuse—generally that of work—for declining our invitations. Now she
wants to make use of us, she can came to see us fast enough."

Mrs. John spoke in an aggrieved tone. She was a fair-haired, blue-eyed
little woman, who had held the post of useful help to a neighbouring
farmer's wife previous to her marriage. She owned rather a sharp tongue
and a jealous temper, but she was an affectionate wife and mother, and
her husband and children loved her dearly. And it was she who, by her
thrifty ways and good management, had helped to make the miller the
well-to-do man he was to-day. Her unreserved manner of speaking to her
servant was to be accounted for by the fact that Jane had lived at the
Mill House before Mr. Grey had married, in his parents' lifetime, and
was regarded more as a friend than a dependent.

"I expect Mrs. Grey hasn't had opportunities for visiting," Jane said
thoughtfully. "She must have had to work very hard since her husband's
death."

"He ought not to have been a clergyman," observed Mrs. John. "Gentlemen
with private means can afford to do as they please, but he came of
working stock. How much wiser it would have been, if he had been
brought up to some business!"

"I don't know about that, ma'am," Jane responded. "Christ's disciples
came from working stock, anyway. Master Rupert was just the man to be a
clergyman, his heart was in his work."

"He should not have married, to leave his wife and child unprovided
for."

"He could not foresee his life would be cut short as it was, ma'am.
I've always wondered why God took him—but, there, He knows best, and
all things will be made plain to us some day. Isn't that the gig I see
in the distance?"

At that moment the wicket-gate swung open, and a little girl, blue-eyed
and fair-haired like her mother, ran up the garden path, crying
excitedly—

"They're coming! They'll be here in a few minutes now! Do come to the
gate to meet them, mother, and you, too, Jane."

[Illustration: ALL THE HOUSEHOLD THERE TO MEET THEM.]

They willingly complied, so that when the gig, in which were seated Mr.
Grey and his sister-in-law, with Mavis between them, drew up before
the Mill House, the strangers were gratified to find all the household
there to meet them.

The miller was the first to get down from the conveyance. He was a
tall, stout man, whose stooping shoulders proclaimed his trade, for
they looked as though they were accustomed to bear heavy burdens such
as sacks of flour. He had a loud, hearty voice, and his plain, somewhat
heavy countenance, usually wore an expression of great kindliness.
Having lifted Mavis from the gig, he helped his sister-in-law to
alight, and then, addressing her by her Christian name—Margaret—he
commenced a round of introductions.

"Margaret, let me introduce you to my wife—Lizzie. Lizzie, this is poor
Rupert's wife, and here's his little girl, who's his living image.
Rose and Bob, come here and speak to your aunt and cousin. Yes, that's
right, Rose, kiss Mavis and make her welcome."

"And here's Jane! You've heard of Jane, haven't you, Margaret? Yes, I
thought Rupert must have spoken of her to you; he and Jane were always
good friends. Now go into the house, all of you—I'm sure the travellers
must want their tea—and I'll be in as soon as I have taken out the
horse. The luggage is coming by the carrier."

The miller's wife led the way into the house with Mrs. Grey, whilst
the children followed with Jane, who told Mavis she ought to feel at
home at the Mill House because her father and grandfather had been born
there. The visitors were taken upstairs by their hostess, to the room
which was to belong to Mavis.

"I thought you would like to occupy the same bedroom," said Mrs. John,
glancing from mother to daughter, "more especially as you are to be
parted so soon."

"Very, very soon!" sighed Mavis, mournfully.

"What a pretty room this is!" exclaimed mother, looking around with an
appreciative smile. "I like that old-fashioned mahogany bed, and the
window-seat; and how nice to be able to indulge in a white counterpane
and white curtains! In London, in the part where we have been living,
they would be drab in no time. It is very kind of you to spare Mavis
such a beautiful room."

"Yes, indeed," Mavis said earnestly; "I shall put my desk on that table
by the window, and there I shall write my letters to you, mother, and—"
Her voice faltered, and the sentence ended in an involuntary sob.

"I hope you will be happy with us, I'm sure," said Mrs. John, her heart
touched by the little girl's emotion. "You must call me 'Aunt Lizzie,'"
she added.

"Yes, Aunt Lizzie," Mavis replied, her face brightening. "Oh," she
cried, as her gaze wandered out of the window, "what a lovely view!"

It was, indeed. For in the distance lay Oxford in the mellow autumn
sunshine. The spires and towers of the grand old university town
standing out against a background of pale-blue sky. Whilst nearer was a
green stretch of meadow-lands through which the river made its way.

"Yes, it is very lovely," her mother agreed. Then, as their hostess
left the room, she continued, "I am so very glad I could come with you,
for now I shall be able to picture everything as it really is. It seems
a dear old house, and I am sure we have been given a hearty welcome.
Now let us be quick and remove the traces of our journey; your aunt
said tea would be ready in a few minutes."

Mavis was a trifle shy with her cousins at first, and greatly
disappointed them, after tea, by saying that she would prefer to remain
with her mother in the parlour to going into the garden with them. Bob,
who was her junior by a year, regarded her rather scornfully; but Rose,
being older, was better able to understand her cousin's feelings, and
whispered to her brother—

"Never mind, Bobbie, she'll like to play with us when her mother's
gone; of course she wants to stay with Aunt Margaret now. Wouldn't you
want to stay with mother if she was going away next week for months and
months?"

So Mavis remained with her mother till bedtime. She was in exceedingly
low spirits, and on retiring to rest, she bedewed her pillow with tears
before she fell asleep. She slept well, however; and when she was
awakened by her mother's kiss, she opened her eyes to find another fine
day had dawned.

That was a never-to-be-forgotten Sunday, and, oh, how very quickly to
two of the inmates of the Mill House it slipped away! To Mavis and
Mrs. Grey, the hours seemed to fly. They attended the services in the
village church in the morning and evening, and the little girl, as she
knelt between her mother and aunt at the latter service, felt that her
heart must surely break, for it was aching so painfully. And when the
Vicar ascended the pulpit to preach, she was glad that the light from
the oil lamps with which the church was lit was so inferior, because
she did not want any one to notice the misery which she was sure was
depicted on her face.

The Vicar, Mr. Moseley, was quite an old man, and Mavis had heard
her uncle tell her mother at dinner-time that he had had a very
troublous life, that his best years had been spent in hard work in the
metropolis, and that he had been presented with the living of W— five
years previously. In a corner of the yard outside the church, he had
laid his wife quite lately. She had been his faithful helpmeet for more
than forty years, and yet there was no sign of trouble on his face as
Mavis saw it by the light of the wax candles in the pulpit, but rather
was its expression one of contentment. In a voice which, without being
loud, was deep and distinct, he gave out his text—

  "Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you:
   not as the world giveth, give I unto you.
   Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid."

It was a sermon about loneliness. The words of his text, the preacher
reminded his congregation, were the words with which Jesus had consoled
His disciples after He had told them He was going to leave them. He had
promised them the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, even the Spirit of truth,
to abide with them for ever. Jesus had not left the world comfortless,
He had left His peace, not such peace as the world gives, it was
something higher, mightier than that, something all-satisfying, for its
root was faith in God. They were not to be troubled, neither were they
to be afraid.

Mavis listened with rapt attention as the Vicar proceeded in such
simple language that she found no difficulty in following him. It
seemed to her that he was preaching to her alone, for all he said
fitted in with her mood. Perhaps God had told him what to say, she
reflected; yes, she was sure He had. She slipped her hand into her
mother's and kept it there, and the sigh she gave at the conclusion of
the sermon was one of contentment. Then the Vicar gave out the number
of a hymn, which was a favourite of hers, and she joined in singing it
heartily.

   "'Saviour, again to Thy dear Name we raise
     With one accord our parting hymn of praise;
     We stand to bless Thee ere our worship cease;
     Then, lowly kneeling, wait Thy word of peace.'"

Many a one in the congregation turned to look at the little girl with
the beautiful voice which rang out so clearly and unfalteringly. And
her aunt wondered that the child should have the heart to sing with
such evident enjoyment on the eve of separation from her mother, as
though she had not a trouble in the world.



CHAPTER IV

MRS. GREY'S DEPARTURE

MRS. GREY was to leave the Mill House soon after breakfast on Monday
morning. Accordingly, she arose at daybreak, and was fully dressed and
had packed her travelling-bag before Mavis awoke. She was standing by
the window looking out, when the little girl opened her eyes, and,
seeing her there, addressed her.

"Good morning, mother. Have I overslept myself?"

"No, dear," Mrs. Grey answered. She crossed to the bedside and kissed
Mavis as she spoke. "Get up now, though," she proceeded. "I want to
have a talk with you before breakfast. We shall have no time together
afterwards."

Mavis jumped out of bed at once. And, whilst she was dressing, her
mother told her that it had been arranged for her to accompany Rose to
school, and that she was to go to-morrow.

"To-morrow!" Mavis echoed. "Oh, I am sorry for that! It is such lovely
weather, and the country looks so beautiful, and it's so nice in the
garden, and—"

"And, in short, you consider you ought to have a holiday before you
commence work," said Mrs. Grey, smiling.

She did not agree with her little daughter, for she knew it would be
better for her mind to be fully occupied during the first days of their
separation.

"You will have a whole holiday every Saturday," she went on to explain.
"And your school hours are not long—from half-past nine to twelve
o'clock in the morning, and from two to four o'clock in the afternoon.
I am sure Rose does not look overworked."

"No," agreed Mavis. "I think I shall like Rose, mother."

"I am glad of that. She and her brother seem nice children. Your aunt
has promised to write to me frequently, Mavis; I believe she will be
very kind to you. And your uncle—"

"Oh, I love Uncle John already!" Mavis broke in. "He has promised to
take me for some drives, and Rose says he's certain to, for he always
keeps his word. What is that noise I hear, mother?"

"The mill wheel. You will soon grow accustomed to the sound. Do you
know that this used to be your father's bedroom? Yes, so your uncle
said. Think how often your father must have looked across those meadows
to Oxford! Ah, I shall picture this view when I am far away, and be
glad that I was able to leave you in your father's home."

Mavis had finished dressing by this time, and was standing by her
mother's side, her mother's arm around her shoulder.

"You will be a good girl during my absence, I know," Mrs. Grey remarked
by-and-by. "Do your best at school, and always obey your aunt, will you
not?"

"Of course, mother," Mavis replied. "I hope you will not be gone very
long, though. Perhaps Miss Dawson will got well quickly."

"I trust she will."

"I wish I had something to give her in return for the locket and chain
she gave me, mother, or that there was something I could do to show her
how grateful I am."

"You can pray for her, my dear, as she asked you. If you and I, who are
well and strong, dread separation, what must she, who is weak and ill,
feel about leaving her father? She knows it is not unlikely that she
will never see him again in this world. It is very sad for her."

"She will have you, mother," Mavis said, with a little sob.

"Yes; but I am merely a stranger to her. You will miss me dreadfully,
I know, darling, but your sense of loneliness will not equal Miss
Dawson's."

"I am glad, yes, I am really glad you are going with her—glad for her
sake, you know."

"It pleases me to hear you say that. Come, dear, let us kneel down and
say our prayers together, and ask God's blessing."

Accordingly, mother and daughter knelt side by side and poured out
their hearts to God. The tears rose to Mavis' eyes, but she resolutely
blinked them away and would not let them overflow, for she was most
anxious not to distress her mother more than she could help.

Shortly after they had arisen from their knees, the breakfast-bell
rang, and they went downstairs. Mavis perceived that every one was
looking at her very sympathetically, and no remarks were made when her
appetite failed her and she left her breakfast almost untasted on her
plate.

As soon as the meal was over, Rose and Bob said good-bye to their aunt,
and betook themselves to school. And not long afterwards, Mr. Grey
strolled out into the yard to order the horse to be put in the gig to
convoy his sister-in-law to Oxford.

It had been previously arranged that Mavis was to say good-bye to her
mother at the Mill House. She would have liked to accompany her to the
railway-station, but Mrs. Grey herself had negatived that idea.

We will not linger over the moments of farewell when the mother and
daughter clung to each other in grief too deep for words. The last
good-bye kisses were exchanged, and Mrs. Grey took her place in the gig
by her brother-in-law's side, whilst Mavis, between her aunt and Jane,
stood outside the wicket-gate, struggling to keep calm.

"Good-bye," Mrs. John said. "We shall hear from you before you sail."

"Good-bye, ma'am," said Jane. "God bless you!"

"Good-bye, mother, dear, dear mother!" cried Mavis, trying to smile.

Then, as the gig moved off, she waved her hand, and continued to do so
till it was out of sight. After that, she found it impossible to keep
her composure any longer, and burst into a flood of tears. Her aunt
and Jane were both very kind and sympathetic, but she begged them to
let her be by herself. And, running into the house, she sought refuge
in her own room, where she sobbed out her grief undisturbed for some
time. By-and-by, however, Jane arrived, duster in hand. And Mavis, who
had now passed the first keen pangs of sorrow, bathed her tear-stained
face, and inquired where she would find her aunt.

"She's downstairs, miss; you'll find her either in the kitchen or the
back garden. Monday's always a busy day with us, for it's washing-day.
A woman from the village, Mrs. Long, comes to wash. She's worked for
Mrs. John for years."

"You mean Aunt Lizzie when you speak of Mrs. John, don't you, Jane?"

"Yes; most folks call her Mrs. John, for master's mother was living
when he married. Your mother is Mrs. Grey now, you know, for your
father was the elder son. He might have had the mill, if he had liked,
but he preferred to be a clergyman. I knew both your father and your
uncle when they were boys. I lived here as servant when they were
growing up, so you see I've been with the family a great many years."

Mavis went downstairs and found her way to the kitchen, beyond which
was a big scullery, and outside that a wash-house, where a stout,
rosy-cheeked woman was hard at work at a wash-tub, up to elbows in
soapsuds, and enveloped in a cloud of steam.

"Good morning, missie," she said to Mavis, smiling at her
good-temperedly, and with sympathy in her glance; for she knew the
little girl's mother had left that morning, and guessed that was the
cause of her sorrowful face.

"Good morning," Mavis replied, returning her smile.

She went out into the kitchen-garden, where she found her aunt hanging
various garments on the clothes lines, which extended the whole length
of the garden.

"Do let me help you, Aunt Lizzie," she said. "Isn't there something I
can do?"

"You might spread these handkerchiefs on the hedge to bleach, they're
Bob's. See what a dreadful colour they are, and no wonder, for I caught
him dusting his boots with one of them and cleaning his slate with
another! Boys make no end of work."

Mavis did as she was desired.

But her aunt had nothing more for her to do, so she found her way
out of the garden by a gate in the hedge into the meadow beyond, and
strolled along the bank of the river.

She was still within sight of the house, when she was startled by a
big, black, formidable-looking dog, which came up and sniffed at her
more out of curiosity—as she was quick enough to discern—than with any
idea of intimidating her. Mavis was unaccustomed to dogs, but she was
no coward, so she extended her hand to the great animal and spoke to
him, whereupon he was so overcome with her condescension that he quite
lost his head, and circled around her in delight, whilst she laughed
heartily.

"Well, little maiden!"

Mavis turned at the sound of an amused voice addressing her, and found
herself face to face with the Vicar. She recognized his elderly,
clean-shaven countenance, with its sweet-tempered mouth and clear grey
eyes, immediately.

"You are not afraid of my dog, I perceive," he proceeded, with a smile.
"You need not be, for he is very quiet. His name is Max. I do not know
you, do I?" he asked doubtfully, as he saw recognition in her glance.

"Oh no!" she responded, quickly.

"I think you must be the miller's little niece," he said, after a
minute's reflection, during which he had noticed the traces of recent
tears on her face. "Mr. Grey told me he expected you, and explained the
circumstances under which you were to be left with him. Is your mother
gone?"

"She went this morning, not long ago," Mavis replied, with quivering
lips. "But she does not sail till Thursday. She is going ever so far
away—to Australia—and I shan't see her for months and months," she
added, mournfully.

"Meanwhile, I hope you will be very happy at the Mill House with your
relatives. Come here, Max."

The dog obeyed his master's call, and allowed Mavis to pat his great
head, after which, he licked her hand, and she felt she had made a
friend.

"He is a Newfoundland," Mr. Moseley said, "and he will fetch anything
out of the water. See!"

He picked up a stone, showed it to the dog, and flung it into the
river. Max dived after it immediately, and presently, reappearing,
swam ashore and laid the same stone at his master's feet. Mavis was
delighted, and the performance was repeated several times for her
benefit.

"What a clever dog he is!" she cried, enthusiastically. "Aren't you
very fond of him?"

"Yes," the Vicar replied, "Max and I are great friends; we understand
each other. How do you think you will like life in the country?" he
inquired.

"I should like it, if mother was here, but I don't think I can be happy
anywhere without her," was the doleful response.

"Oh yes, you can," he said decidedly; "you must try to be happy; that
is the duty of every one. Life is hard for most of us at some time or
other; it brings pain and separation. But we ought not to become gloomy
and sad. If there were no partings, there would be no happy meetings.
What is your name, my dear?"

"Mavis Grey."

"Mavis is a very pretty name. A little girl with that name should be as
happy as a bird!"

Mavis smiled. She thought she would like to tell him how much she had
enjoyed his sermon last night. And, after a brief hesitation, she did
so.

He appeared greatly pleased.

"It was just as though you knew how lonely I was feeling," she said
eagerly, "just as though you were preaching to me. I shall remember all
you said—always, I hope. I'm not going to let my heart be troubled—not
more than I can help. And I'm going to try not to be afraid, though
there are so many things which might happen to mother!"

"There are many things which might happen to all of us. But we must
trust ourselves and those we love to our Father in Heaven." Mr. Moseley
paused for a minute, then proceeded, "I did not know my sermon last
night was appropriate to any one in particular, but God knew, we may be
sure of that."

"Did He tell you what to say?" Mavis inquired. "Oh," she cried, as her
companion assented, "I was certain He did."

Mavis lingered a short while longer in conversation with her new
acquaintance. Then she remembered that her aunt might be wondering
where she was, and, having said good-bye to Mr. Moseley and bestowed a
farewell pat on Max, she retraced her footsteps the way she had come.
Her drooping spirits were reviving, for her talk with the Vicar had
done her good. She looked up into the clear, blue sky overhead, and a
glow of happiness crept into her heart. Then she glanced across the
sweep of meadow-lands, and began to sing in a soft undertone—

   "The Lord is only my support, and He that doth me feed;
    How can I then lack anything whereof I stand in need?
    In pastures green He feedeth me, where I do safely lie;
    And after leads me to the streams which run most pleasantly."

Meanwhile, Mr. Grey had returned from Oxford, and was in the
kitchen-garden talking to his wife, who had brought out another basket
of clothes. He was telling her, that he had seen his sister-in-law off
from the railway-station, and was inquiring what had become of Mavis,
when the little girl appeared at the garden gate.

"Why, she's singing!" he exclaimed, in surprise.

"I don't understand her," his wife replied, looking puzzled. "She
seemed very cut up after her mother had gone, and wept most bitterly,
but I think her feelings must be all on the surface—they can't go very
deep."

At that moment Mavis caught sight of them. Her voice suddenly ceased,
and she ran up to her uncle, to learn that her mother had really gone.

"What was that you were singing, Mavis?" he inquired, curiously.

"The twenty-third psalm, Uncle John," she answered; "seeing the green
meadows put me in mind of it."

Then, observing he looked bewildered, she continued eagerly, "Don't you
understand? 'He maketh me to lie down in green pastures.'"

"Oh, now I follow your train of thought," he replied, with a smile,
glancing at his wife. "Fancy a child like you thinking of that!"



CHAPTER V

PETTY JEALOUSY

THE morning following Mrs. Grey's departure from the Mill House, Mavis
accompanied Rose to school. Their way led past the church and the
vicarage, and through the village. And as they went, Mavis looked about
her with interested eyes, admiring the picturesque creeper-covered
cottages with their trim gardens and thatched roofs.

"They seem to sell everything here," she remarked, with an amused
smile, as she paused before the one shop of the place, which was also
the post-office, "groceries, brushes, notepaper, and medicines too, I
declare!"

"We must not dawdle," said Rose, as her cousin lingered, peering into
the shop window, "or we shall be late, and that won't do.'

"Would Miss Matthews be angry?" inquired Mavis. "Is she very strict?"

"Yes," nodded Rose; "mother says it's right she should be. If we were
late, she would keep us in after twelve o'clock, and most likely give
us each an imposition—though perhaps you would go unpunished, as it is
your first day. You have never been to school before, have you?"

"Never. Mother taught me to read and write. And then a young lady, a
governess who lodged at the same house that we did, used to teach me in
the evenings. How many girls are there at Miss Matthews' school?"

"About a dozen—most of them are boarders. Here we are. You see it takes
us quite a quarter of an hour to walk to school."

Miss Matthews' house was at the far end of the village. It was a modern
red-brick villa with bow windows, over the under-blinds of one of which
Mavis saw the heads of several girls. Rose led the way into the house
by a side door. And, having shown her cousin where to leave her hat
and jacket on one of a row of pegs in the passage, piloted her to the
schoolroom, and introduced her to her schoolfellows. A few minutes
later, Miss Matthews herself appeared upon the scene, followed by a
young governess called Miss Forbes.

"So this is my new pupil," observed Miss Matthews, her eyes
scrutinizing Mavis very kindly as she shook hands with her. "You are
called Mavis, I hear," she proceeded; "it is an uncommon name and a
very pretty one."

Miss Matthews was a dark, middle-aged woman with a plain, clever face,
and Mavis' first impression of her was that she was very ugly, but the
moment a smile lit up her countenance, she decided that she was really
quite good-looking.

By-and-by, the new pupil was handed over to the governess, who classed
her with several little girls varying from ten to twelve years of age.
And so her school life began.

It was soon discovered that though Mavis' education had been carried
on in a somewhat desultory fashion, she was by no means backward. She
owned an excellent memory, and was quick to learn, taking after her
father, as her uncle remarked when Rose told him how easily her cousin
mastered her lessons.

"She has inherited Rupert's clever brain," he said to his wife. "You
can look in her face and see she's as sharp as a needle. I hope she'll
brisk up our Rose, who's one of the slow, plodding sort—like myself,"
he added, with a laugh.

This speech did not please his hearer, though she recognized its truth.
Rose had many excellent qualities, but she was not in the least clever,
as far as book-learning was concerned, and found lessons great drudgery.

Mavis was very soon on the best of terms with all the inmates of
the Mill House, with the exception of her aunt, whom she found it
impossible to like as well as the others, though she could not have
told why she did not feel at home with her, if she had been asked for
a reason. The fact was, Mrs. John failed to understand Mavis, who
was naturally of a light-hearted, joyous disposition, and she was
confirmed in her impression, as time went on, that the child's nature
was a superficial one. When, on the morning subsequent to the day on
which the 'Nineveh' had sailed from Plymouth, Mavis had received a
farewell letter from her mother, over which she had shed tears, she
had had her aunt's full sympathy. But when, a few hours later, she had
returned from school with Rose, apparently in good spirits, her aunt
had privately dubbed her a heartless little thing, being quite unaware
of the brave fight the child had made against depression.

"I advise you not to make too much of Mavis," Mrs. John remarked to
her husband on one occasion, after he had taken the little girl for a
drive. "You will spoil her if you're not careful."

"Oh, nonsense, my dear," he replied; "there's small danger of my doing
that. She's had few pleasures in her life, poor child, and our young
folks have had a great many. Bob wanted to accompany me to-day—he said
it was his turn—but I told him he must give up his place in the gig to
his cousin."

"That was hard on the boy, John."

"Not at all. I don't see it."

But Bob himself considered that it had been very hard, for he was
unaccustomed to self-sacrifice, and he liked nothing so well as driving
with his father. So when, after tea, Mavis commenced telling him and
Rose of the delightful time she had had, he listened in somewhat sullen
silence.

"It was so kind of Uncle John to take me to Oxford," Mavis said
happily. "I think it is such a lovely place, with those beautiful
virginian creepers growing all over the colleges."

"The leaves will soon be off the creepers after the first frost,"
remarked Rose. "I'm glad you've seen them, Mavis. Some people think
Oxford prettier in the autumn than at any time, but I like it in the
spring, when the hawthorn and lilacs and laburnums are in flower."

"Uncle put up the horse at an inn, and took me to see T—, that
was father's college, you know, and he pointed out the rooms that
were father's once, and I saw the chapel and the lime-walk, and he
told me such a lot about father, how clever he was, and that he
won scholarships, and in that way more than half paid for his own
education. Oh, how I wish mother could have been with me to-day!"

"You'll be able to tell her all about it some time," said Rose, as she
noticed a shade of sadness cross her cousin's face.

"Oh yes; but not for a long, long time. How did you and Bob spend the
afternoon?" Mavis asked, glancing from the sister to the brother.

"We went blackberry gathering," answered Rose.

"It was slow work," observed Bob, joining in the conversation at last.
"You had the best of it, Mavis," he added, grudgingly.

"Indeed I think I did," Mavis agreed, with a smile. Then, becoming
aware by the expression of Bob's face that he was displeased, she
inquired, "Would you have liked to have gone to Oxford instead of me
this afternoon?"

"Rather!" he exclaimed. "Father took you for a drive last Saturday,
too!" he reminded her, in a way which showed he resented the fact.

"Bob!" exclaimed Rose, in an expostulating tone.

"Well, it's not fair that father should make more of Mavis than of us,"
he grumbled, "I know mother thinks so too."

"For shame!" cried Rose, her kind heart touched by the hurt expression
on her cousin's face. "Don't take any notice of what he says, Mavis."

"I didn't know he wanted to go this afternoon," murmured Mavis, looking
distressed, "but I suppose one of you would have gone, if I had not
been here. I—I am very sorry."

"There is nothing to be sorry about," Rose replied. "There, I believe
you've made her cry," she said, turning upon her brother with
indignation, as Mavis slipped quietly out of the room. "I saw tears
in her eyes. You are very selfish, and you ought to be ashamed of
yourself, Bob. If father makes much of Mavis, it's only because he
wants her to be happy with us. It's so sad that her mother should have
had to go away and leave her."

"I didn't mean to make her cry," Bob answered. "I call her a great
baby!"

"She's quite a little girl, of course," said Rose, who, being two years
her cousin's senior, felt almost grown up in comparison to her, "but I
don't consider her at all babyish. See how little fuss she made when
her mother left!"

"I don't believe she cared—not much, heard mother say so to Jane; she
said Mavis was singing a few hours after Aunt Margaret had gone, and
people don't sing if they're sad."

Rose did not argue the point. Instead, she went upstairs in search of
Mavis, whom she found in her bedroom, sitting on a chair by the window
in the dark.

"What are you doing, Mavis?" she asked.

"Nothing," Mavis answered, "only thinking, and—and wishing that mother
had left me in London with Miss Tompkins. I never guessed Bob wanted to
go this afternoon, I never thought that I was taking his place!"

"It was very selfish and unkind of him to speak as he did, and father
would be very angry if he knew he had done so. Think no more of it,
Mavis. You haven't been crying, have you?"

"No," Mavis answered. "I've been praying," she added, after a minute's
pause.

"Praying?" Rose was surprised. "But it isn't bedtime," she said, "I
always say my prayers night and morning, don't you?"

"Yes, and odd times besides, whenever I feel I want to. It—it comforts
me. It's so nice to think Jesus is always near to hear one, isn't it,
and to remember He understands what other people can't? I expect Bob
thinks it was very selfish of me to go to Oxford with Uncle John—"

"I shall tell father how he spoke to you!" Rose broke in, impetuously.

"Oh, don't, please don't!" implored Mavis. "Don't let us say any more
about it. Promise you won't."

Rose gave the required promise, and the two little girls went
downstairs together. Bob, who was now ashamed of the jealous spirit he
had exhibited, found an opportunity during the evening of telling Mavis
he was sorry if he had seemed unkind, and that he was really glad that
she had enjoyed the afternoon.

September was nearly out now, but the fine weather continued, so that
the young folks were able to spend their spare time out-of-doors. They
had several blackberrying expeditions, from which they returned laden
with luscious fruit, which Jane converted into bramble jelly. Mavis
soon knew the prettiest walks around W—, and learnt the dangerous
places in the river, where the water was deep and swift.

Sometimes in their rambles, the children came upon Mr. Moseley, who
generally stopped and talked to them. Rose and Bob, like many country
children, were shy, and had little to say for themselves. But Mavis, on
the contrary, was always ready to further a conversation.

"You should have heard Mavis chattering to the Vicar this afternoon,"
said Bob to his mother, one Saturday evening. "I should think she
talked to him for quite half an hour."

"Oh, quite!" agreed Mavis.

"I hope he did not think you a forward little girl, Mavis," said her
aunt gravely, with a note of rebuke in her voice.

Mavis coloured indignantly, and a quick retort rose to her lips, but
she refrained from uttering it, and kept silence.

"Mr. Moseley asked Mavis what she thought of Oxford, and she told him,"
explained Rose. "And then he questioned her about Aunt Margaret, and
when the 'Nineveh' was due to arrive at Sydney, and of course, she had
to answer him."

"Yes," assented her mother, "that was quite right. But little girls
must not be too ready with their tongues."

"Rose isn't," said Bob, with a mischievous glance at his sister. "She
scarcely spoke a word to Mr. Moseley this afternoon."

"I-I don't know Mr. Moseley very well," stammered poor Rose, "and I was
shy, I suppose. So were you, Bob, for that matter."

"Bob is three years your junior, Rose," said her mother. "At your age,
you ought not to be shy. Why could you not talk to the Vicar as well as
Mavis?"

Rose hung her head and made no response, whilst her cousin felt very
uncomfortable. Mavis was fully conscious, by this time, that her aunt
did not approve of her, that she regarded her with critical eyes, and
that she was always displeased if any one noticed her more than her
cousins. And these facts prevented her from being as happy as she
otherwise would have been at the Mill House. She was never quite at her
ease in her aunt's presence, and certainly never at her best. And yet,
Mrs. John had no intention of being otherwise than just and kind to her
little niece, and was vexed when she observed that Mavis' affection for
her uncle was deepening day by day, whilst she held more and more aloof
from herself.

"Aunt Lizzie doesn't like me," Mavis thought frequently, and she would
wonder if she could have possibly done anything to evoke her aunt's
displeasure. "I try to please her, but I see she doesn't care for me,
and I'm afraid I don't care for her—much."



CHAPTER VI

ROSE IN TROUBLE

AUTUMN had given place to winter, a wet, depressing winter with rain
and westerly gales, and the flat country between W— and Oxford was
flooded. There had been almost incessant rain for weeks now. And Mavis,
as she sat at the little table by her bedroom window engaged in writing
a letter to her mother, which she was taking great pains to spell
correctly, considering every word, glanced at the leaden sky every now
and again, in the hope of seeing a break in the clouds.

"I don't think we ever had such bad weather in London," she reflected.
"But perhaps I didn't notice it so much there. What will happen, I
wonder, if the floods go on increasing? We seem almost surrounded by
water as it is."

By-and-by, Rose came to the door, wanting to know if her cousin had
nearly finished her letter.

"Yes," Mavis replied, "I'm ending up now. Come in, Rosie."

So Rose came in. The two little girls had become very friendly by this
time, for, though there was a difference of two years in their ages,
in many ways Mavis appeared as old if not older than her cousin, no
doubt because she had always been to a great extent in her mother's
confidence. Rose had lived her twelve years in a home where she had had
every comfort. Whilst Mavis had known times when she and her mother
could not have told from what source the wherewithal was to come to
provide them with the necessaries of life, and yet God had never
allowed them to want, He had given them always sufficient for their
needs.

"What is the matter, Rose?" said Mavis, as, having put away her writing
materials, she turned her attention to her cousin, who stood at the
window with an expression of gloom on her face.

"Nothing more than usual," Rose answered, in a tone which implied
that she generally had much to bear. "Mother's been scolding me," she
proceeded, as Mavis continued to look at her inquiringly. "She says
she's most dissatisfied with the progress I'm making at school, that if
I'm not careful you'll soon get ahead of me, and—and I can't help it,
if you do. I try to learn, Mavis, but I'm so slow, and—oh, you mustn't
think that I'm jealous of you, for I'm not!"

"Of course I don't think that, Rosie," Mavis replied, greatly
distressed at the sight of her cousin's tearful eyes and quivering
lips. "It wouldn't be true, if you did. I told mother that Miss
Matthews said it was quite likely you would be raised into my class
next term. I thought she'd be pleased; but, instead, she was angry with
me, and called me a dunce. Perhaps I am a dunce," Rose admitted, with a
sob. "If I am, I can't help it."

Mavis did not know what to say. She was aware that Rose learnt with
difficulty, and that her mother was frequently impatient with her for
being so slow, which seemed to her very unkind. And she had looked
forward to being in the same class as her cousin, because she thought
it would be pleasant for them to do their lessons together.

"Miss Matthews knows that I try to get on," Rose continued, in the same
aggrieved tone. "She never complains of me, and I don't consider mother
ought to have scolded me, just because I'm not so sharp as other girls.
She doesn't worry Bob about his lessons like she does me. Bob's her
favourite, and he can do nothing amiss. I declare I won't try to learn
any more, for mother's sure to find fault with me, anyway! It's most
unjust."

"I don't suppose Aunt Lizzie understands how hard you try to learn,"
Mavis said, putting her arms around Rose and kissing her flushed cheek.
"Don't be unhappy about it, dear. You do your best, I'm sure."

"That's why I feel it's so hard mother should be cross with me, Mavis.
I don't idle my time away, like some of the girls at school do, and—and
she says I must, or I shouldn't be so backward." Rose brushed away an
angry tear, and choked back a sob. "Let us talk of something else," she
said. "You've been writing to Aunt Margaret, haven't you?"

"Yes. Aunt Lizzie said I might enclose a letter with one she has
written. I wonder how long this rainy weather will last, Rosie."

"Father thinks we shall have a change soon, for the wind is getting
more northerly; it's been due west for weeks. If we get frost now the
floods are out, we shall have fine skating; you will like that, Mavis?"

"I can't skate," Mavis answered. "I never tried."

"Oh, we will soon teach you. I am looking forward to a long spell of
frost, like we had last winter."

"Are you? We thought that frost was dreadful in London, because it made
things so hard for the poor—they don't feel the wet so much as long as
it's mild, but when it's cold and frosty, the distress is terrible.
Last winter, not far from where we lived, a poor old woman was found
dead on a doorstep; I couldn't sleep for nights afterwards for thinking
of her."

"How shocking!" exclaimed Rose, in an awe-struck voice. "Had she no
home?"

"No. There are hundreds and hundreds of people in London without homes.
Mother knew a great many poor people, and it used to make her so sad
when she couldn't help them. Often they'd come and tell her their
troubles, because, you see, being poor herself, she could understand
better than if she had been rich," Mavis explained, with a wisdom
beyond her years.

"Were you, then, very poor, Mavis?" Rose inquired, wonderingly.

"Yes," nodded Mavis; "but we always had enough to eat, though sometimes
it was only bread-and-butter. Once we couldn't pay our rent, and mother
was in great trouble about that, but Miss Tompkins was very kind, and
said she would willingly wait for it. And then, mother had a good
engagement to nurse a rich old gentleman for a few weeks, so Miss
Tompkins hadn't to wait long."

"Why didn't your mother write to father for some money, Mavis?" asked
Rose. "I am sure he would have been very pleased to send her some."

"I am sure he would, too, now I know him. I don't know why she didn't
write to him; perhaps she did not like to bother him, yes, that must
have been it."

"Father says Aunt Margaret has been a wonderful woman to do as she has
done, with no one to help her," remarked Rose.

"God helped her," said Mavis, simply; "mother says He helps all who
trust in Him."

"You tell Him all your troubles, don't you, Mavis?" Rose asked. Then,
as her cousin nodded assent, she said, "I don't mean only great
troubles, but little ones?"

"Oh yes."

"Well, I don't. I just say my regular prayers twice a day, and that's
all. I don't feel God's my Friend, like you do."

"Don't you? Oh, but you should. I'd tell Him everything, if I were you."

"What, that mother's vexed with me for being slow at school, for
instance?"

"Yes. God knows you do your best, Rosie, if Aunt Lizzie doesn't. I'd
ask Him to make her believe it, if I were you. Mother says when we've
told God our trouble, we oughtn't to worry about it any more, but just
leave it to Him, and He'll be sure to put it right."

"Do you really think that?"

"Of course I do. He has promised to bear our troubles, and you know
it says in the Bible, 'there has not failed one word of all His good
promise.' I'll show you the verse, if you like."

"It astonishes me that you should be so religious," Rose observed,
after a few minutes' thought, "because you're such a merry little soul
as a rule, always singing about the place and ready for any fun, and I
thought religious people were generally very solemn."

"Oh, do you think so? Mother says religion ought to make people joyous
and happy, and that it's mistrusting God to be gloomy and sad. That's
why I've tried not to trouble about her leaving me; but sometimes I
haven't been able to help crying when I've thought how far she's gone
away, and then I've felt so bad about it afterwards."

At that moment heavy footsteps, easily recognizable as Mr. Grey's, were
heard ascending the stairs, and a minute later came a knock at the
door, and a voice outside called—

"Mavis, I've news for you, my dear."

"News?" Mavis sprang to the door and flung it open wide. "Oh, Uncle
John," she cried, as she saw her uncle standing smiling at her, "do you
mean that you have news of mother? But no, it cannot be that!"

"Yes, it is, child," Mr. Grey responded, "and good news, too. The
'Nineveh' has arrived at Sydney. Your mother's in first-rate health,
and Miss Dawson is better. I've had a letter from Mr. Dawson, and he
has had a cablegram from your mother. It seems, he promised her he
would let us know as soon as he heard from her. It is very good news,
isn't it?"

"Splendid!" cried Mavis, her face aglow with happiness. "How kind of
Mr. Dawson to write to you, Uncle John! I never guessed we should get
news so soon, did you?"

"Well, I thought it just possible," Mr. Grey admitted, "but I didn't
say a word about it, for fear you should be disappointed. Mr. Dawson is
evidently in high spirits, judging from the tone of his letter. And I
don't believe your mother would raise his hopes about his daughter, if
she had not good cause for doing so. The change of climate may really
set up the poor young lady's health, after all, and I sincerely hope
God may spare her life. Her father has my sympathy. I know how grieved
I should feel if I had to send my little girl away from me, especially
if she was ill."

And Mr. Grey smiled affectionately at Rose as he spoke.

She threw her arms around his neck and hugged and kissed him again and
again, exclaiming the while—

"Oh, you dear father! You do love me, don't you, just as much as though
I was clever?"

"Bless the child, yes," he replied, with his hearty laugh. "Why, Rosie,
there are tears in your eyes. What's the meaning of that?"

She would not tell him, however, and he was wiser than to press the
question.

Meanwhile, Mavis had gone in search of the other members of the
household to impart her news to them. Her heart was singing with joy,
and her aunt thought she had never seen a brighter, happier pair of
eyes than those which peeped around the kitchen door to see if she was
there.

"Such good news, Aunt Lizzie!" cried Mavis, and she proceeded to
explain what it was.

"Thank God they have made the journey in safety!" exclaimed Jane, who
had stopped in the midst of the important business of stove-cleaning
when the little girl had appeared.

"I do thank Him," Mavis answered, softly.

"How relieved in mind Mr. Dawson must be!" exclaimed Mrs. John.
She was rubbing the contents of the plate-basket with a piece of
chamois leather, her usual task on a Saturday afternoon. "Poor man, I
sympathize with him greatly," she continued, "especially as Miss Dawson
is his only child. How grateful he will be to your mother, Mavis, if
she brings him back her patient restored to health!"

"Mother will take good care of her," Mavis responded. "She's a capital
nurse, every one who knows her says that; but only God can make Miss
Dawson well."

"That's so," agreed Jane, with a nod, as she returned to her stove.
"I don't believe that child ever forgets that God's above all," she
remarked, as Mavis left the kitchen to look for Bob, to impart her news
to him. "It's to be hoped she'll always remember it."

"She's a strange little thing," her mistress answered, "so very
childish in some ways, and in others thoughtful beyond her years."



CHAPTER VII

A GREAT GIFT

THE heavy rains had ceased, and there had been several nights of hard
frost, which had covered the flooded meadows surrounding W— with a
thick coating of ice.

"The ice will bear to-day," remarked Mr. Grey, one morning at
breakfast. "I believe we're in for a spell of dry weather. You must
look to your skates, children, for, if all's well, you'll get some
skating now."

By the following morning—a Saturday—the ice was in splendid condition,
and the young people of the village spent nearly the whole day on it,
as well as many of their elders.

Mavis had been supplied with an old pair of skates which had belonged
to Rose, who had bought a new pair the previous season. And during the
morning, her uncle gave her, her first lesson in skating; but he was
called away on business in the afternoon, and she was left to her own
resources. She got on by herself fairly well, and managed to keep her
feet unaided; but it was slow work, and she grew tired and cold long
before her cousins were ready to leave the ice. By-and-by she divested
herself of her skates, and declared to Rose her intention of going home.

[Illustration: SHE WAS LEFT TO HER OWN RESOURCES.]

"What, already?" cried Rose. "Why, how cold you look! I'm most
beautifully warm. You don't want me to go with you, do you?" she asked.

"Oh no," Mavis replied, "certainly not. I don't think I've got on
badly. But I can't skate fast enough to keep warm like you, and my feet
are so cold, there's no feeling in them. Otherwise I should like to
stay and look on."

Rose nodded, and skimmed away over the ice. Whilst Mavis left the
meadow by the gateway, and turned into the road leading to the village,
through which she had to pass on her way home, walking briskly to get
herself warm.

It was a perfect winter afternoon. The sun was sinking rosily in the
western sky, and the keen, frosty air was most invigorating. Mavis had
enjoyed the day; but she sighed, and her pretty face grow grave as she
thought of those to whom frost meant only added misery, and she felt
glad that there were no extremely poor people in W—.

"I don't suppose there's any one in the place who hasn't enough to
eat," she reflected. "For I heard uncle say last night that the
villagers were very well looked after; they get coal-tickets, and they
belong to blanket clubs, and they have good homes."

She had reached the village by this time, and was passing the
post-office when the Vicar came out, followed by his dog. A smile lit
up Mr. Moseley's kindly countenance as his eyes fell on the little girl.

"All alone?" he said. "How is that?"

"I got so very cold on the ice that I thought I'd go home," Mavis
explained, as she patted Max. "I only began to learn to skate to-day,
and I grew very tired."

"Naturally. You are warmer now?"

"Oh yes, thank you. I have been walking fast. Max is very pleased to
see me, isn't he?"

"Very. He counts you as a friend, there is no doubt about that. I am
glad to hear you have had good news of your mother. I saw your uncle
a few days ago, and he mentioned that Mrs. Grey had arrived at Sydney
safely."

"Oh yes. I shall be having a letter from her from Sydney before
Christmas, I expect. Did uncle tell you that Miss Dawson is better, Mr.
Moseley?"

"Miss Dawson is the young lady your mother is nursing, I suppose? No,
your uncle did not tell me that; but I am very glad."

"She is such a pretty young lady, and so rich; but she is very
delicate, though you wouldn't think it to look at her. I never saw her
but once, and then she was very kind to me. She gave me a beautiful
gold locket and chain for a keepsake. I had nothing of the kind before,
and we got quite friendly, though we were only together for a little
while. Isn't it odd how quickly one gets friendly with some people?"

He smiled and assented. They were walking in the direction of the
vicarage, which Mavis had to pass on her way home.

"I think it's very strange," the little girl continued, knitting her
brows thoughtfully. "Now, Rose and I are great friends, and, on the
whole, I get on well with Bob, and I'm very fond of Uncle John; but, do
you know—" she dropped her voice confidentially as she spoke—"I never
can quite like Aunt Lizzie. I do hope it isn't very wrong of me."

"Why can't you like her?" the Vicar asked, looking surprised.

"I don't know," Mavis admitted, shaking her head.

"She's kind to you, I'm sure."

"Oh yes, yes!" The little girl grew red, and hesitated. "Please, Mr.
Moseley, what is it to be superficial?" she asked, by-and-by. "Is it
something one ought not to be?"

"To be superficial is to be all on the surface—shallow," he replied.
"But why do you ask that?"

"Aunt Lizzie says I'm superficial," Mavis explained. "I heard her tell
Uncle John so. But he said no, I was not. Indeed, I was not trying to
listen," she proceeded quickly. "I was coming downstairs, and they
were in the hall. I didn't know they were talking about me. Then it's
nothing very bad if one is superficial, Mr. Moseley?"

"No," he answered, with an involuntary smile; "and it's nothing for
you to trouble about. But I agree with your uncle. I think, perhaps,
your aunt is mistaken; she probably does not understand you, and you
evidently do not understand her. No doubt you will get to know each
other better by-and-by. I am coming to see your aunt about you one day
soon."

"About me?" Mavis exclaimed, questioningly.

"Yes. I am going to get up a concert—not just yet, during Christmas
week—and invite all the villagers to attend. It will be held in the
schoolroom, and I think you can help me, if your aunt will permit it."

"I!" cried the little girl in amazement. "What can I do?"

"You can sing. I have heard you on several occasions when you have
been with your cousins in the woods, though you have not known I have
been listening. Once I heard you sing a most beautiful version of the
twenty-third psalm, and that is what I should like you to sing at my
concert."

"Oh, Mr. Moseley, I don't think I could—before a lot of strange people!"

"Not if it gave them pleasure?" he inquired, with a smile.

"I should be so nervous," faltered the little girl.

"Perhaps, at first, but you would very soon get over that."

"But I have never learnt to sing properly—not with music, I mean. I
couldn't sing with a piano; it would put me out."

"I should like you to sing without an accompaniment, as you have been
accustomed. God has given you a groat gift, my dear, don't you think He
expects you to use it for the benefit of others?"

"Do you think that?" Mavis asked earnestly.

"Certainly I do. The poet Longfellow says that God sent His singers
upon earth—"

   "'That they might touch the hearts of men,
     And bring them back to heaven again.'"

"Those lines recurred to my memory when I heard you sing that
beautiful, comforting psalm."

Mavis' face broke into a sudden, radiant smile. In imagination, she
heard Miss Dawson's well-remembered voice saying: "You have given me
comfort, and reminded me that I am not setting out on a long journey
without support from God." She knew the sick girl had referred to the
words she had previously sung—

   "The Lord is only my support, and He that doth me feed;
    How can I then lack anything whereof I stand in need?"

Had God indeed given her a great gift, expecting her to use it for the
benefit of others? She had never thought of her voice in that light
before; she had sung instinctively, like the bird after which she had
been named.

"Mr. Moseley, I will sing at your concert gladly, if Aunt Lizzie will
let me," she said, at length.

"Thank you, my dear. I felt sure you would. Well, I shall call at the
Mill House shortly. You will soon run home from here?"

"Oh yes," assented Mavis.

They had reached the vicarage gate, and, having shaken hands with
her companion, and put her arms around Max's neck and given him an
affectionate hug, she hastened on. She felt very light-hearted, and
hummed a little tune happily to herself as she tripped along. But her
voice suddenly ceased as she neared the Mill House and caught sight of
a man's figure ahead of her, clad in a ragged suit of clothes. A pang
of pity shot through her sympathetic heart.

"I suppose he's a tramp or a beggar," she thought, "he looks dreadfully
poor."

The man turned at the sound of her light footsteps, and looked at her.
She saw his face was pinched and blue with the cold, and that it wore a
very wretched, dispirited expression. As she caught up to him, he spoke.

"Have you a penny you could spare me, missie?" he said, in a voice
which sounded weak, she thought. He was quite a young man, tall and
broad-shouldered, but extremely thin.

"No, I haven't," she replied, regretfully. "Oh, I'm so sorry! You do
look miserably cold."

"Aye, I'm cold," he agreed, with a short, bitter laugh, "cold and
hungry, too."

"Hungry? Oh dear, how dreadful! Do you live here—at W— I mean?"

"No. I'm on the look-out for work—have been for weeks—but it's very
scarce. I'm not a beggar from choice. I've been hanging around the mill
in hopes of seeing the miller, thinking that he might give me a job.
They told me in the village that he wanted a man to drive a waggon."

"I believe he does," said Mavis. "But he's not at home this afternoon.
I live at the Mill House; Mr. Grey's my uncle. Go round to the back
door, I'm sure my aunt will give you something to eat."

The man looked at her doubtfully, but he did as he was told.

Meanwhile Mavis passed through the wicket-gate, ran up the garden path,
and entered the house by the front door. She found her aunt in the
parlour, engaged in darning stockings, and immediately informed her
that there was a poor starving man outside.

"Do give him some food, please, Aunt Lizzie, and let him warm himself
by the kitchen fire," she said, pleadingly. "He wants to see Uncle
John, to ask him if he can give him work. Mayn't he come in and wait? I
have sent him around to the back door."

"Really, Mavis, you take too much upon yourself!" cried her aunt,
irascibly. "I never encourage tramps; the workhouse is always open to
them. I must send this man off at once."

"Aunt Lizzie, you don't mean it!" exclaimed Mavis, aghast. "Oh, you
won't be so cruel! He is hungry, I am certain he is, and, oh, it will
be unkind if you don't give him something to eat—if only a slice of
bread!"

The little girl repented having spoken so hastily the moment after
the words had passed her lips, and she hung her head and commenced a
stammering apology. Her aunt did not stay to listen to it, however, but
hurried to the kitchen. The man was already at the back door, and Jane
was speaking to him.

"I dare say missus will give you a bit of bread and meat," she was
remarking, as Mrs. John, closely followed by Mavis, entered the kitchen.

"How often have I warned you not to encourage tramps, Jane!" said her
mistress, severely. "Go away, or I'll report you to the police for
begging," she declared, imperatively motioning to the man to depart.

"The little lady thought you'd give me something to eat, ma'am," he
said. "She told me to come."

"Yes, I did," asserted Mavis, nearly weeping. "Oh, Aunt Lizzie, don't,
don't send him away hungry."

Mrs. John wavered. She looked scrutinizingly at the man, and saw he was
evidently wretchedly cold and inadequately clothed, and her heart was
stirred with pity. So she went into the larder and cut some bread and
meat, which she gave him.

"Thank you, ma'am," he said, his tone evincing real gratitude. But
though he addressed the donor of the food, his glance went past her to
Mavis. He was not allowed to say more, however, for at that moment the
door was shut in his face, and he had no choice but to go away.

"I am never knowingly unkind to any one, Mavis," Mrs. John said, as she
turned her attention to her little niece, who was furtively wiping her
eyes, "and I am greatly astonished that you should have spoken to me in
such an unbecoming manner."

"It was very wrong of me, and I'll never do so again, Aunt Lizzie,"
Mavis responded, in a tremulous voice. "But you didn't seem to
understand that the poor man was really hungry. Won't you forgive me? I
did not mean to be rude. I spoke without thinking."

"Yes, I forgive you. But never presume to dictate to me again. Why have
you returned before the others?"

Mavis explained, and went on to repeat the conversation she had held
with the Vicar, to which her aunt listened with an expression of
disapproval on her countenance, afterwards remarking—

"You are too young, in my opinion, to sing in public. However, I
will hear what Mr. Moseley has to say, and consult your uncle upon
the matter. The idea of a child like you singing at a concert. It is
preposterous to think of it!"

Mavis made no answer, for she saw Mrs. John was greatly displeased. She
thought it was because of the manner in which she had addressed her in
reference to the hungry stranger, and was quite unaware that, added to
that, her aunt was jealous on her children's account. Truth to tell,
Mrs. John was annoyed that the Vicar should seek to bring Mavis into
notice. She would not admit, even to herself, that the little girl had
a wonderfully beautiful voice.



CHAPTER VIII

LOOKING FORWARD TO CHRISTMAS

THE miller's thrifty wife was not by any means a hard woman, but she
lacked that quick sympathy for others which is generally the outcome of
a vivid imagination joined to a kindly heart. She never realized the
sorrows of her fellow-creatures without they were set plainly before
her. And though she was in many ways much shrewder than her husband,
she often made mistakes of which he would have been incapable.

She had been a worker all her life, and consequently entertained a
great contempt for idlers. And she believed that if people worked they
always got on well, for that had been her own experience. She had lived
rather a narrow life, with few interests outside her own family.

Had it been otherwise, doubtless she would have known that sometimes
God denies success—as the world counts success—to those who do their
best and work their hardest. Thus it was, that rarely did any one come
to her for help or sympathy, whilst many were the tales of woe which
were poured into her husband's ears.

When Mavis had hastened to her aunt requesting food for a hungry man,
Mrs. John had immediately jumped to the conclusion that he must be a
professional beggar, and therefore a dangerous character. Her eyes
had shown her the real misery of his condition, however, so she had
fed him. But she had not been possessed of sufficient discernment to
notice that he was not an ordinary mendicant, so that when her husband
informed her, a few days later, at dinner-time, that he had engaged the
man she had so unwillingly assisted, to drive one of his waggons, she
was greatly astonished.

"You cannot mean it!" she explained. "Why, he was literally in rags!
John, surely you are very unwise."

"That remains to be proved, my dear," responded her husband, gravely,
"but I hope I am not. The man is accustomed to horses; he has been in
the employ of a farmer living near Woodstock, and I see no reason why
he should not suit me, if he keeps the promises he has made me to be
honest and steady. His name is Richard Butt, and he's twenty-five years
of age, and has a young wife, who is at present living with her parents
at Woodstock."

"Then he doesn't support her? He has been out of work some time, I
suppose? Why did he leave his last place?"

"Well, he got himself into trouble, my dear; he was very frank about
it, and I have made inquiries, and find he told me the truth. Remember,
children," Mr. Grey proceeded, addressing the three young folks, who
were present and listening with great interest, "this is not to go
beyond our own household, you are not to speak of it to outsiders."

"We will not!" they agreed eagerly.

"Well, he was caught poaching, and sent to prison for six weeks,"
Mr. Grey went on to explain. "No doubt he deserved his punishment.
Of course, when he was released from jail, he found his master had
filled his place and had no work for him. And his young wife, unable
to pay the rent of their cottage, had been obliged to give it up and
return to her own people. For several weeks now, he has been tramping
the district for miles around in search of employment, without any
success, ashamed to return to Woodstock, where he is well-known, to be
a disgrace to his relations."

"On Saturday, he heard I wanted a waggoner, so he waited about the
place till he could see me, which was on Monday. I believe he slept two
nights in the cattle shed in Brimley meadow, and I'm certain he's been
half starved."

"Oh, how terrible!" cried Rose.

Whilst Mavis, a little paler than usual, glanced at her aunt, who was
listening with an impatient frown on her forehead.

"This cold, frosty weather, too!" exclaimed Bob. "To think of us all
with plenty to eat, a fire to warm ourselves by, and comfortable beds
to lie on, and some one close to our house in that old tumble-down
shed!"

"You must look over my stock of clothes, Lizzie," said the miller, "and
see if I can't spare the poor fellow a suit. You don't approve of my
having engaged him to work for me, I see."

"How can I approve of your befriending a man of that class? Do you
expect a poacher to be honest? He'll rob you for a certainty."

"I trust not; but if he does, I shall get rid of him at once. And at
any rate, I shall have given him a chance to redeem his character.
I've written to his late master, who informs me that Richard Butt is a
strong, willing young fellow, and that he believes he took to poaching
for the love of sport. I don't know about that, I'm sure; but I don't
fancy he'll attempt anything of that kind again. Mind you, I'm not
making excuses for him. As I've told him, a man who poaches a rabbit is
as much a thief as a man who robs a poultry-yard, the principle is the
same. But I can't help being sorry for him, and I wouldn't have it on
my conscience for anything that I might have assisted a fellow-creature
and hadn't done it. It's the right thing, I take it, to give a helping
hand where one can."

"Perhaps God sent him to you on purpose, Uncle John," said Mavis;
"because you could give him work, I mean."

"May be so, my dear," agreed the miller.

"When does he commence to work for you?" inquired his wife, still
looking dubious.

"Next Monday. He has found lodgings in the village."

"How has he managed about money?"

"Well, I have advanced him a little," Mr. Grey admitted. "I offered to
do so, and I believe he is very grateful to me."

"It is to be hoped he will keep faith with you, John," his wife
remarked drily.

"You will look-out a suit of clothes for him, won't you, Lizzie?"

"I will, if he turns up on Monday as arranged. But it would not
astonish me, if he does not. We shall see."

Richard Butt did keep faith with the kind man who had befriended him,
however. And proved himself quite equal to the task he had undertaken,
to drive the big waggon with its pair of fine horses.

Mrs. John duly presented him with a suit of her husband's clothes, and
various other articles of clothing which she thought might be useful to
him. And she took the opportunity to question him about his wife, whom
he said he was going to send for as soon as he could make a home for
her.

"She's been able to save a few bits of our furniture," he explained,
"and if I give Mr. Grey satisfaction, and find he's willing to keep me
on, I shall look-out for a cottage in the village. Meantime, my wife
will stay with her parents, she's no expense to them, for she earns
enough for herself by doing plain needlework."

The children, Mavis especially, took great interest in the new
waggoner. And they were careful not to tell any one the circumstances
which had brought him to the deplorable position he had been in when
Mr. Grey had taken pity upon him. He had paid the penalty for his sin,
and was starting life afresh.

The severe frost continued for more than a fortnight, and Mavis learnt
to skate very nicely. Many happy hours did she spend with her cousins
and her schoolfellows on the ice; and deeply regretful were the young
people when a thaw set in, and weather-wise folks began to prophesy a
mild Christmas.

Rose and Bob were looking forward to Christmas with much eagerness,
for the season had always been a very happy one for them. But Mavis
was anticipating the coming festival with very sober thoughts.
Hitherto, she and her mother had been together at Christmas; now they
were divided by thousands and thousands of miles of land and sea. She
listened somewhat half-heartedly to her cousins' plans for making
the most of the holidays, until Rose gave her a look of wonder and
reproach, and said—

"What is the matter? You don't seem yourself, Mavis."

"I've been thinking of last Christmas, and that has made me rather
sad," Mavis answered. "Mother and I were together then," she added, the
tears rushing to her hazel eyes as she spoke.

"Oh!" cried Rose, comprehendingly, whilst Bob inquired—

"Did you have a lot of presents?"

"No; I only had two—a work-basket from mother, and a story-book from
Miss Tompkins. But it was a lovely Christmas! Mother and I were so
happy together! On Christmas Eve, it was fine, and we went out and had
a good look at the shops. We enjoyed seeing all the pretty things,
and thinking what we would buy, if we were rich. We spent Christmas
Day quite by ourselves. In the morning, we went to the service at a
little mission church where father used to preach sometimes—the people
who go there are mostly poor people, some of them so poor that they
wouldn't like to go and sit with those who are well-dressed. And in
the afternoon, after dinner, we sat by the fire and talked, and never,
never dreamed that we should be so far apart from each other when
Christmas came again."

And Mavis heaved a deep sigh.

"Oh, you mustn't get sad," said Rose, earnestly. "I'm sure your
mother wouldn't like you to be that. We want you to have a very happy
Christmas. We shall break up at school about the twentieth of December,
and then we shall be very busy at home, making mincemeat and puddings,
and preparing our Christmas presents."

The time had arrived now when Mavis might expect her mother's first
letter from Sydney. It was delivered one afternoon whilst she was at
school, and given to her immediately on her return. She ran upstairs
to her bedroom to enjoy it undisturbed, and her heart throbbed with
happiness as she read that her mother was well, and that Miss Dawson
was continuing to improve in health.

   "You are constantly in my thoughts and prayers, little daughter,"
Mrs. Grey had written, "and ever in my heart. God bless and keep you,
my darling child. I enclose a money-order for a pound, for you to spend
as you like; doubtless you will find it useful at Christmas."

"Oh, how nice!" exclaimed Mavis, delighted beyond measure. "Now I shall
be able to give presents to every one! A whole pound! I never had more
than half a crown in my life before!"

She finished reading her mother's letter, then went back to the
beginning, and read it right through to the end again before she looked
into the envelope for the money-order. There it was safe enough, and
a half-sheet of notepaper, on which were written a few lines in an
unfamiliar handwriting—

   "DEAR LITTLE MAVIS,"

     "This is to wish you a very happy Christmas. I am really better,
and I believe God is going to allow me to get well. Often I have been
very low-spirited and sad since we left England, but when I have
thought of the Good Shepherd, of whom you sang to me so sweetly, I have
felt better. 'The Lord is only my support,' dear Mavis, and I am
learning to trust in Him more and more. Your mother is so good to me,
so patient, so kind; we have become great friends."

     "I have written to my father asking him to send you a present from
London for me; you may expect to get it a few days before Christmas.
It will be my Christmas-box to you, and please accept it with my love.
Good-bye little song-bird. Some day I hope to hear you sing again.
Don't forget—"

                                   "LAURA DAWSON."

"That's not very likely," thought the little girl, "no, indeed. What
can she be going to give me for a Christmas-box?"

"Rose, is that you?" she called out, as she heard light footsteps
approaching the door.

"Oh, do come in and listen to all my news!"

Then, as Rose came in, her blue eyes fall of curiosity, she continued
excitedly, "I've had such a dear, dear letter from mother, and she's
sent me a pound for my very own, to spend as I like. You'll help me
about getting Christmas presents for every one, won't you?"

"Of course I will," agreed her cousin. "How is Aunt Margaret?"

"Oh, very well; she has written so brightly. Miss Dawson is ever so
much better, and I have had a little note from her. You shall hear what
she says."

And Mavis read aloud the few lines Miss Dawson had sent her.

"I am wondering what the Christmas-box will be," she remarked
afterwards.

"I expect it will be a nice present, and I hope it will be something
you will like," said Rose. "By the way, I came up to tell you that
Mr. Moseley has been here, and he has got mother to consent to your
singing at his concert—it's not to be till New Year's Eve. Mother was
against the idea at first, but father said he was certain Aunt Margaret
would have no objection to it, and so she gave in. Mr. Moseley is very
pleased, she says, and I think she's glad now that you're going to take
part in the concert. We shall all go to hear you sing. I expect nearly
every one in the village will be there. Shall you feel nervous?"

"I am afraid so, Rosie. I only hope I shall not break down."

"Oh, I don't fancy you'll do that. I envy you your voice, Mavis—at
least, I don't envy it exactly, but I wish I had a talent of some sort.
I'm so very stupid; I can't do anything to give people pleasure."

"Oh, Rosie, I am sure that is not true. Miss Matthews said the other
day that you were the kindest girl in the school. I told Aunt Lizzie
that; she was pleased, though she didn't say much. How can you be
stupid, when you always manage to find out how to make people happier
by doing little things to please them?"

"Oh, that's nothing," exclaimed Rose. The colour on her cheeks had
deepened as she had listened to her cousin's words. "It would make me
very unhappy to be unkind to any one," she added.

"I am certain it would."

"But I wish I had just one talent," Rose sighed. "If God had given me
only one, I would have been content."

Mavis looked troubled for a minute; then her face brightened as she
responded hopefully—

"I think you're sure to have one, Rosie, only you haven't found it out."



CHAPTER IX

CHRISTMAS TIME

"THERE, now I have all my presents ready," Mavis declared in a
satisfied tone, one morning a few days before Christmas, as she dropped
great splashes of red sealing-wax on the small parcel she had already
secured firmly with cord. "I do hope Miss Tompkins will like the
handkerchief sachet I'm sending her."

"I should think she will be sure to like it," said Rose, who was
standing looking out of the parlour window at the birds she had been
feeding with bread-crumbs. "I wonder when Miss Dawson's Christmas-box
will arrive, Mavis."

"Soon, I expect. I should not be surprised if it came at any time now,
for it's getting very near Christmas, isn't it?"

The little girls' holidays had commenced two days before, and since
then, they had been very busy preparing for Christmas. Mr. Grey had
kindly driven them into Oxford, one afternoon, to make their various
purchases, and but a shilling or so remained of Mavis' pound, the
rest having been spent in presents which were hidden in the bottom of
her trunk in her bedroom, to be kept secret from every one but Rose,
until Christmas Day. For kind Miss Tompkins she had bought a pink
silk handkerchief sachet with birds painted on it, and this, with a
carefully-written note, she had packed in readiness to send off that
evening.

"I wonder what mother is doing in the kitchen," remarked Rose,
presently. "She said at breakfast she would have a leisureable day, as
the puddings are boiled and the mincemeat is made, and we're to have
a cold dinner. But I've heard her bustling about as though she's very
busy. Let us go and see what she's doing."

Accordingly, the little girls repaired to the kitchen, where they found
Mrs. John in the midst of packing a hamper with Christmas cheer.

"I dare say I'm very foolish to do this," she was remarking to Jane,
who was watching her with a half-smile on her countenance, "but it's
your master's wish, and I won't go against him in the matter. There'll
be ten shillings' worth in this hamper, if a penny, what with that nice
plump chicken, the pudding, a jar of mincemeat, a pound of tea, a pound
of butter, and—well children?" she said inquiringly, as the little
girls came forward.

"Who is that hamper for, mother?" asked Rose, her curiosity alive in a
moment.

"For Richard Butt's wife," was the brief answer.

"Oh, how kind of you, Aunt Lizzie!" cried Mavis. "How pleased she will
be, won't she?"

"It's to be hoped so, and I dare say she will. But the kindness is not
mine, child, it's your uncle's. 'Fill in the corners of the hamper,
Lizzie,' he said, and you see I'm doing it."

"I should like to be looking on when that hamper's opened," observed
Jane, as her mistress placed down the cover and began to cord it.
"It'll arrive as a blessing, I reckon. Butt was talking to me about his
wife and child yesterday, and—"

"His child, Jane? I didn't know he had one," broke in Mrs. John,
greatly astonished.

"The baby's only a fortnight old, ma'am. I didn't know there was one
myself till yesterday."

"Is it a girl or a boy?"

"A boy, a fine healthy little chap, so Butt's mother-in-law has written
to tell him."

"How he must wish to see the baby!" exclaimed Mrs. John, with a
softening countenance.

"He's hoping to, before long, ma'am, for there'll be a cottage vacant
in the village at Christmas, and he means to take it. Then, as soon
as he possibly can, he's going to ask master to allow him a couple of
days' holiday to fetch his wife and baby."

"He appears to have taken you into his confidence, Jane."

Jane nodded. The hamper was corded by this time, and all that remained
to be done was to address a label.

Mrs. John glanced out of the window, then turned to Rose.

"There's Butt in the yard now; he's going into Oxford with the waggon
presently, so he can send off the hamper himself from the station. Tell
him I want him."

Rose went to do her mother's bidding, and a few minutes later returned,
followed by Richard Butt, who had greatly improved in appearance since
the afternoon he had begged from Mavis, and she had impulsively sent
him around to the back door. Then he had looked ragged, cold, and
dispirited; now he was comfortably clad, and held his head erect once
more.

"What is your wife's address, Butt?" inquired Mrs. John.

"My wife's address, ma'am!" the man exclaimed, in amazement.

"Yes. This hamper is to go to her; it contains a chicken, and a
pudding, and a few other things, and you're to send it off from Oxford.
Here's the money to pay the carriage. Tell me the address."

He did so, and Mrs. John wrote it on the label, which she proceeded to
affix to the hamper.

"Ma'am, I can never thank you properly," the young man stammered,
quite overcome with gratitude and surprise. He looked at the shilling
Mrs. John had given him, then at the hamper. "God bless you for your
goodness!" he added fervently.

"It's your master's doing. It's nothing to do with me. There, take the
hamper away with you. By-the-by, I hear you've a little son, Butt; I
hope his father will be a good example to him."

The tone in which this was said was more cordial than the words, and
Butt carried off the hamper with a radiant countenance.

"I think I never saw any one look more pleased," observed Jane. "Who
comes now?" she exclaimed, as there was a loud knock at the back door.

She went to see, and reappeared bearing a large wooden box which she
deposited on the kitchen table, saying—

"It's come by the railway van, and it's directed to you, Miss Mavis.
There's nothing to pay, but you must please sign this book, to show
it's been delivered safely."

"Oh, it's Miss Dawson's Christmas-box, for certain!" cried Rose.

Whilst Mavis, feeling very important and excited, signed the delivery
book under Jane's directions.

"Oh, Mavis, open it quickly and see what's inside! Here's a knife to
cut the cord."

"Not too fast, Rose," said her mother. "Better untie the knots, then
the cord will come to use again—it's a good strong piece. Here, let me
help," and she effected the task herself. "There, Mavis, now you can
set to work and unpack."

Mavis lifted the lid of the box, her hands trembling with excitement,
and drew out several packages, which, upon examination, proved to
contain preserved fruits and sweetmeats in pretty boxes, such as she
had often seen in the shops at Christmas-time, but had never dreamed of
possessing. Then came a beautifully bound and illustrated story-book,
and several new games, at the sight of which Rose expressed much
gratification, and, last of all, a cardboard box, which, upon being
opened, revealed to sight a seal-skin cap and a muff to match.

"Oh!" exclaimed Mavis, quite incapable of finding words in which to
express her delight.

"Put on the cap, Miss Mavis," said Jane. "Let us see how you look in
it."

So Mavis placed the cap on her curly head, and glanced from one to the
other with the happiest of smiles on her pretty, flushed countenance.

"Yes, it suits you capitally," declared Jane. "Doesn't it, ma'am?" she
questioned, turning to her mistress.

"Yes, indeed," agreed Mrs. John. "I think, Mavis, that you are a very
fortunate little girl," she proceeded, as she took up and examined the
muff. "It is real seal-skin, I see, and must have cost a pretty penny."

"There's Bob!" cried Rose, catching the sound of her brother's
footsteps in the passage. "Come and see Mavis' Christmas-box," she
said, as he opened the door and entered the kitchen. "Look at her
seal-skin cap and muff, and all the rest of the presents she has had
sent her."

"What will you do with them all, Mavis?" asked Bob, as he came to the
table and stood with his hands behind his back, not liking to touch
anything.

"We'll share all the sweeties, Bob," said Mavis; "of course we shall
do that. I only want one box of preserved fruit for myself, to give to
Mrs. Long, and the rest I should like Aunt Lizzie to put with the nice
things she has bought for Christmas."

"Very well," Mrs. John agreed, pleased at the suggestion, "I will do
so. You shall have some of the fruit on Christmas Day and the rest
later on, or we shall be having all the good things at once. By the
way, what makes you wish to give a present to Mrs. Long, Mavis?"

Mrs. Long was the stout, rosy-cheeked washerwoman Mavis had first
seen on the day she had said good-bye to her mother. On subsequent
occasions, the little girl had held conversations with her, but Mrs.
John did not know that.

"She has been very kind to me, Aunt Lizzie," Mavis answered.

"Oh, I don't mean that she's done anything for me, you know," she
continued, as she met her aunt's glance of surprise, "but she's spoken
to me so nicely about mother that I quite love her. She says she knows
what it is to be separated from some one, one loves very dearly, for
her only daughter married and went to New Zealand, and her husband's
dead, so that now she's all alone. I should like to give her a little
present for Christmas, if you do not mind."

"Of course I do not mind, child. All these things are your own, to do
as you like with."

"I want other people to enjoy them too," Mavis said earnestly. "I never
had anything to give away before this Christmas."

She selected one of the prettiest of the boxes of preserved
fruits, and, later in the day, she and her cousins called at Mrs.
Long's cottage in the village and presented it to the kind-hearted
washerwoman, who, needless to say, was exceedingly pleased.

What a happy Christmas that was, and yet how Mavis had dreaded it! It
brought her nothing but joy from the moment she opened her eyes on
Christmas morning till, wearied out, she closed them at night.

Afterwards, she wrote to her mother all about it, and told her how rich
she was in presents, for, besides Miss Dawson's Christmas-box, she had
received remembrances from every member of the household at the Mill
House, and from Miss Tompkins too, as well as Christmas cards from
several of her schoolfellows.

"I have so many friends now," she wrote, "and last Christmas I had so
few. When we meet I shall have such a lot to tell you, dear mother. I
can't write everything. I believe Aunt Lizzie has written and told you
that I am to sing at a concert on New Year's Eve; I am to sing your
favourite psalm. Mr. Moseley says my voice is a great gift. He is a
very nice man, and has been very kind to me—I think there are a great
many kind people in the world."

Mavis had never so much as hinted to her mother that she was not on
such cordial terms with her aunt as with her other relations, for she
could not explain why that was the case, and, lately, she had got on
with her rather better. Mrs. John had been obliged to admit to herself
that Mavis was not selfish, that she did not try to put herself before
her cousins in any way, and that she was quick to show gratitude for a
kindness, and to respond to affection. But what she did not understand
in the child, was her capability of laying aside trouble.

"She has just the nature of a song-bird," she would think, when Mavis'
voice, lilting some simple ditty, would fall upon her ears. "She's such
a light-hearted little thing."

The concert, which was held in the village schoolroom on New Year's
Eve, proved a very great success. The performers were all well-known
inhabitants of the parish, in whom the audience—composed mostly of the
labouring classes—took great interest.

Mavis' part of the programme did not come till nearly the conclusion
of the concert, and when the Vicar took her by the hand and led her on
the platform, she felt it would be quite impossible for her to keep
her promise, and she was inclined to run away and hide. But, a moment
later, she had overcome the impulse which had prompted her to go from
her word, and looking above the many faces which were smiling up at
her encouragingly, she summoned up her courage and commenced to sing.
Her voice was rather tremulous at first, but it gained strength as
it proceeded. She forgot the people watching her, forgot her fear of
breaking down, and thought only of what she was singing, of "pastures
green" and the Good Shepherd leading His flock by streams "which run
most pleasantly." As her sweet, clear voice ceased, there was a murmur
of gratification from the audience, which swelled into rounds of
applause.

"Sing us something else, do, missie!" she heard some one shout from the
back of the schoolroom, and, looking in the direction from whence the
voice came, she recognized Richard Butt.

The rest took up the cry, and from all sides came the demand, "Sing us
something else!"

"What else do you know, Mavis?" the Vicar hastened to inquire, when he
saw she was willing to comply with the general request.

"I know some carols," she replied. "Shall I sing one of those?"

"Yes, do," he said, as he moved away.

She was not feeling in the least nervous now. Her heart throbbed with
happiness, as she realized her capability of giving pleasure, and a
brilliant colour glowed in her cheeks, whilst her hazel eyes shone
brightly.

The carol she sang was one she had heard in the little mission church
in London during the previous Christmas season, but it was new to her
audience.

   "'When shepherds were abiding,
       In Beth'lem's lonely field,
     They heard the joyful tidings
       By the heavenly host revealed.
     At first they were affrighted,
       But they soon forgot their fear,
     While the angel sang of Christmas,
       And proclaimed a bright new year.'"

That was the first verse; several others followed, concluding thus—

   "'When he who came to Bethlehem
       Returns to earth again,
     Ten thousand thousand angels
       Shall follow in His train:
     Then saints shall sing in triumph,
       Till heaven and earth shall hear;
     The year of His redeemed shall come,
       A bright immortal year.'"

The carol was as successful in pleasing as had been the psalm, and
Mavis stepped from the platform and returned to her seat with the Mill
House party, hearing commendatory remarks on all sides.

"Oh, Mavis," whispered Rose, "you sang beautifully, you did indeed!"

And she expressed the opinion of the whole room, including Mrs. John,
who, for the first time, acknowledged that really Mavis owned a very
sympathetic voice, and that the words she had sung had seemed to have
come from her heart.



CHAPTER X

SICKNESS AT THE MILL HOUSE

"OH, Mavis! Oh, Bob! Mother's very ill! Oh, isn't it dreadful? The
doctor's going to send a hospital nurse to take care of her, for he
says she'll be ill for weeks, if—if she recovers!" And Rose finished
her sentence with a burst of tears.

The scene was the parlour at the Mill House one afternoon during the
first week of the new year. Rose had crept quietly into the room with
a scared look on her face, having overheard a conversation between her
father and the village doctor, the latter of whom had been called in
to prescribe for Mrs. John, who had been ailing since the night of the
concert, when she had taken a chill.

No one had thought her seriously ill until that morning, when she had
declared herself too unwell to rise, and had been unable to touch the
breakfast which her little daughter had carried upstairs to her. Then
it was that her husband had become alarmed, and the doctor had been
sent for. The medical man's face had worn a grave expression as he had
left the sick-room, and he had immediately informed Mr. Grey that his
wife was seriously ill with pneumonia, the result of a neglected cold.

"If she recovers?" echoed Bob, questioningly. "What do you mean, Rose?
It's only a cold that mother has, isn't it?"

"No, it's something much worse than that—pneumonia. Mrs. Long's husband
died from pneumonia." And poor Rose's tears and sobs increased at the
remembrance.

"Oh, don't cry so dreadfully, Rosie," implored Mavis. "People often
recover from pneumonia, indeed they do! Mother has nursed several
pneumonia patients since I can remember, and not one of them died. You
mustn't think Aunt Lizzie won't recover."

"But she's very ill—the doctor said so," returned Rose, nevertheless
checking her sobs, and regarding Mavis with an expression of dawning
hope in her blue eyes. "He said she would require most careful nursing,
and he couldn't tell how it would go with her."

"Doctors never can tell," said Mavis, sagely. "Mother says they can
only do their best, and leave the result to God. Poor Aunt Lizzie! How
sorry I am she should be so ill!"

"The doctor says we are not to go into her room again," sighed Rose. "I
heard him say to father, 'Don't let the children into her room to worry
her; she must be kept very quiet.'"

"As though we would worry her!" cried Bob, in much indignation. He felt
inclined to follow his sister's example and burst into tears. But he
manfully, though with much difficulty, retained his composure.

Before night, a trained nurse from a nursing institution at Oxford was
installed at the Mill House, and took possession of the sick-room. And
during the anxious days which followed, the miller's wife approached
very near the valley of the shadow of death, so that those who loved
her went in fear and trembling, and stole about the house with
noiseless footsteps and hushed voices.

But at length, a day arrived when the patient was pronounced to have
taken a turn for the better. And after that, she continued to progress
favourably until, one never-to-be-forgotten morning, the doctor
pronounced her life out of danger.

"We shall be allowed to see her soon now, father, shan't we?" Rose
inquired eagerly, after she had heard the good news from her father's
lips.

"I hope so, my dear," he answered. "It will not be long before she
will be asking for you, if I'm not mistaken. But she's been too ill
to notice anything or any one. You won't forget to thank God for His
goodness in sparing your mother's precious life, will you, Rosie?"

"No, indeed, father," she responded, earnestly. "We prayed—Bob, and
Mavis, and I—that God would make dear mother well again, and you see He
is going to do it. I felt so—so helpless and despairing, and there was
only God who could do anything, and so—and so—"

"And so you were driven to Him for help and consolation? Ah, that's the
way with many folks! They forget Him when things go smooth, but they're
glad to turn to Him when their path in life is rough. But His love
never fails. You found Him a true Friend, eh, my Rose?"

"Yes, father, I did. Mavis said I should; she said I must remember that
Jesus Himself said, 'Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid,' and that I must trust in Him. And I tried not to be afraid. I
couldn't do anything but pray; and after a while I began to feel that
God really did hear my prayers, and I don't believe He'll ever seem
quite so far off again."

Mr. Grey had guessed rightly in thinking his wife would soon desire to
see her children, for the day following the one on which the doctor
had pronounced her life out of danger, she asked for them, and they
were allowed into the sick-room long enough for each to kiss her and
be assured, in a weak whisper from her own lips, that she was really
better.

The next day, they saw her again for a longer time, but she did not
inquire for Mavis, a fact which hurt the little girl, though she did
not say so, and strengthened her previous impression that her aunt did
not like her.

Before very long, Rose was allowed in and out of the sick-room as she
pleased, and was several times left in charge of the invalid. She
proved herself to be so helpful and reliable that, on one occasion, the
nurse complimented her upon those points, and she subsequently sought
her cousin in unusually high spirits.

"Mavis, what do you think?" she cried, in great excitement. "Nurse
says she is sure I have a real talent for nursing! Fancy that! But for
mother's illness, I should never have found it out, should I? Oh, I'm
so glad to know that I really have a talent for something, after all!"

Meanwhile, Mrs. John was gaining strength daily. Although she had not
expressed a wish to see Mavis, she thought of her a good deal, and she
missed the sound of her voice about the house.

"Where is Mavis?" she asked Rose, at length. Then, on being informed
that the little girl was downstairs in the parlour, she inquired, "How
is it I never hear her singing now?"

"Oh, mother, she would not sing now you are ill," Rose replied.

"She would not disturb me—I think I should like to hear her. It must be
a privation to her not to sing."

"I don't think she has felt much like singing lately. We've all been so
troubled about you—Mavis too. Oh, I don't know how I could have borne
it whilst you were so dreadfully ill, if it had not been for Mavis!"

"What do you mean, Rose?"

"She kept up my heart about you, mother. And she's been so good to us
all—helping Jane with the housework, lending Bob her games and keeping
him amused, and doing everything she could to cheer us up. Wouldn't you
like to see her?"

"Yes," assented Mrs. John, "to-morrow, perhaps."

So the following day found Mavis by her aunt's bedside, looking with
sympathetic eyes at the wan face on the pillow.

"I'm so glad you're so much better, Aunt Lizzie," she whispered softly.
"You'll soon get strong now."

"I hope so, Mavis. My illness has spoiled your holidays, I fear. You
must have had a very dull time."

"A very sad, anxious time," Mavis said gravely; "but never mind—that's
past."

"And you will soon forget it," her aunt remarked, with a faint smile.

"Oh no, Aunt Lizzie, I'm not likely to do that! But I'd so much rather
look forward to your being well again. We were all so wretched when you
were so terribly ill, and now God has made us happy and glad. Why, I
feel I could sing for joy!"

"I think you rarely find difficulty in doing that, Mavis; you are so
light-hearted."

"Not always, Aunt Lizzie; but I do try to be."

"Why?" Mrs. John inquired, in surprise.

"Because Jesus said, 'Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid,'" Mavis answered, seriously. "I try not to be troubled or
afraid," she continued; "but it's very, very hard not to be sometimes.
I found that when mother went away; nothing seemed to matter much when
we were together, but after she'd gone—oh, then it was different. I
felt my heart would break, it ached so badly, but—are you sure I am not
tiring you, Aunt Lizzie?"

"No; I like to hear you talk. Go on—tell me all you felt when your
mother went away."

Mavis complied. She would have opened her heart to her aunt before, if
she had ever had the least encouragement to make her her confidante.
By-and-by, she became aware that there were tears in the sunken eyes
which were watching the varying expressions of her countenance, and she
ceased speaking abruptly.

"You must have been very lonely and sad, child," Mrs. John said. "I
never realized you felt the parting from your mother so much. I wish I
had known; but I thought—"

She paused, and did not explain what she had thought. She was beginning
to understand that she had misjudged Mavis, and the knowledge that
she had done so humiliated her, whilst she was conscious that she had
allowed her jealous heart to prejudice her against the child. "I might
have been kinder to you, my dear," she admitted, with a sigh.

"Oh, Aunt Lizzie, you have always been kind to me," Mavis said
gratefully, unaware that Mrs. John's conscience was reminding her not
so much of actions as of thoughts.

"I don't know what I have said to make you cry," she added, as a tear
ran down her aunt's pale cheek. She wiped the tear away with her
handkerchief as she spoke, and kissed the invalid. She had never felt
greatly drawn towards her before, always having been a little in awe of
her, but at that moment the barrier of misunderstanding which had stood
between them was swept aside.

"I have not heard you singing lately," Mrs. John remarked, by-and-by.
"Rose tells me you have been fearful of disturbing me. You need not be
now, for I believe it will cheer me greatly to hear you singing again.
Our song-bird has been silent long enough."

Mavis smiled, and kissed her once more, and shortly after that, the
nurse, who had been absent, returned, and confidential conversation was
at an end.

The young people had been back to school for several weeks before the
mistress of the Mill House was about again, and it was some time before
she was well enough to undertake her accustomed duties. But with the
lengthening days, she gained strength more rapidly, and the doctor said
she needed only the spring sunshine to make her well.

In the meanwhile, Mavis continued to receive cheering news from
her mother, who wrote every mail. Miss Dawson was much better, and
there was now every reason to hope that she would return to England
completely restored to health. But when that would be, Mrs. Grey had
not yet said, though in one letter she had remarked that perhaps it
would be sooner than Mavis expected. The little girl's heart had
thrilled with happiness when she had read that.

Almost the first news Mrs. John was told when she was about again
after her illness, was that Richard Butt, who had taken a cottage in
the village, had been allowed a few days' holiday, and the loan of a
waggon, on which he had conveyed his household furniture and his wife
and baby from Woodstock to their new home.

"They're comfortably settled in now, ma'am," said Jane, who had
explained all this to her mistress. "I've been to see them. Mrs. Butt
seems a nice, well-mannered young woman, and the child's as fine a baby
as you ever saw in your life."

"Yes," joined in Rose. "And father's very pleased with Butt, because
he's so careful of the horses, and he hasn't had the least cause of
complaint against him yet. Aren't you glad to know that, mother?"

"Butt thinks a great deal of father," Bob said, eagerly, "and no
wonder! He told me he was almost despairing when father gave him work.
He said father was one of the few people who wouldn't hit a man when
he's down. I know what he means, don't you, mother?"

"Yes," was the brief assent.

"So do I," said Mavis. "I think the Good Samaritan in the parable must
have been very like Uncle John."

There was one piece of news which Rose had refrained from mentioning to
her mother as yet, and that was that she and Mavis were now in the same
class at school. She dreaded telling her this, and it was a decided
relief when she learnt that it was not necessary for her to do so, as
Mavis had forestalled her.

Mavis had also told her aunt, how greatly Rose was troubled on account
of her slowness in learning, and how really painstaking she was, and
this, coupled with Miss Matthews' report that Rose was patient and
industrious and always desirous of doing her best, caused Mrs. John to
reflect that she had been a little hard on her daughter.

"Although she's not quick like her cousin, she has many good
qualities," she thought to herself. "God does not endow us all with
gifts alike, and I have been unwise to make comparisons between the
children."

So she spoke kindly and encouragingly upon the matter to Rose, who
exclaimed, with a ring of glad surprise in her voice—

"Oh, mother, I so feared you would be angry with me for allowing
Mavis to catch up to me in her lessons! Indeed, indeed, I have done
my best. I know I'm slow and stupid in many ways; but God has given
me one talent, and, now I know that, I don't mind. Nurse said I had a
real talent for nursing, so I mean to be a nurse when I grow up. Mavis
will be a great singer, I expect, but I shall be quite content to be a
nurse."

Mrs. John made no response, but she pressed a warm kiss on Rose's lips,
and her little daughter saw she was pleased, and added ingenuously—

"I asked God to make you understand I'd done my best, and He has."



CHAPTER XI

HAPPY DAYS

IT was a beautiful afternoon in May. The lilac and laburnum trees were
in full bloom in the Mill House garden. And fritillaries—snakes' heads,
as some people call them—were plentiful in the meadows surrounding W—,
lifting their purple and white speckled heads above the buttercups and
daisies in the fresh-springing green grass.

"I think they are such funny flowers," said Mavis, who with Rose, had
been for a walk by the towpath towards Oxford, along which they were
now returning. She looked at the big bunch of fritillaries she had
gathered, as she spoke. "And though they are really like snakes' heads,
I call them very pretty," she added.

"Yes," agreed Rose. "Look, Mavis, there's Mr. Moseley in front of us.
He's been sending Max into the water. I expect we shall catch up to
him."

"And then I shall be able to tell him my news!" Mavis cried
delightedly. "Oh, Rosie, I don't think I was ever so happy in my life
before as I am to-day!"

A few minutes later, the two little girls had overtaken the Vicar. And,
after they had exchanged greetings with him, Mavis told him her news,
which she had only heard that morning, that her mother and Miss Dawson
were returning to England, and were expected to arrive before midsummer.

"No wonder you look so radiant," he said, kindly.

Then, as Rose ran on ahead with Max, who was inciting her to throw
something for him to fetch out of the river, he continued: "I remember
so well the day I made your acquaintance, my dear. You were in sore
trouble, and you told me you did not think you could be happy anywhere
without your mother. Do you recollect that?"

"Oh yes," Mavis replied. "And you said if there were no partings there
would be no happy meetings, and that we must trust those we love to our
Father in heaven. And you asked me my name, and, when I had told it,
you said I ought to be as happy as a bird. I felt much better after
that talk with you, and I have been very happy at the Mill House—much
happier lately, too. I don't know how it is, but Aunt Lizzie and I get
on much better now."

"You have grown to understand each other?" suggested the Vicar.

"Yes—since her illness," Mavis replied.

The Vicar was silent. He had visited Mrs. John during her sickness,
and knew how very near she had been to death's door. And he thought
very likely her experience of weakness and dependence upon others had
softened her, and taught her much which she had failed to learn during
her years of health and strength.

"Mother says Miss Dawson is quite well now," Mavis proceeded. "I am
looking forward to meeting her again; I do wonder when that will be!"

She glanced at her companion as she spoke, and saw he was looking grave
and, she thought, a little sad.

"Is anything amiss, Mr. Moseley?" she asked, impulsively.

"No, my dear," he replied. "I was merely thinking of two delicate young
girls who were very dear to me. They died many years ago; but their
lives might have been saved, if they could have had a long sea voyage
and a few months' sojourn in a warmer climate. However, that was not to
be."

"They did not go?"

"No. Their father was a poor man, with no rich friends to help him, and
so—they died."

"Oh, how very sad!" exclaimed Mavis, with quick comprehension. "A trip
to Australia and back costs a lot of money, I know. Oh, Mr. Moseley,
how dreadful to see any one die for want of money, when some people
have so much! How hard it must be! Didn't their poor father almost
break his heart with grief? I should think he never could have been
happy again."

"You are wrong, my dear. He is an old man now, with few earthly ties,
but he is happy. Wife and children are gone, but he knows they are safe
with God, and he looks forward to meeting them again when his life's
work is over."

He changed the conversation then. But Mavis knew he had been speaking
of himself, and that the young girls he had mentioned had been his own
children, and her heart was too full of sympathy for words. Silently,
she walked along by his side, till they overtook Rose. When Max created
a diversion by coming close to her and shaking the water from his
shaggy coat, thus treating her to an unexpected shower-bath.

"Oh, Max, you need not have done that!" cried Rose, laughing merrily,
whilst the Vicar admonished his favourite too.

But Max was far too excited to heed reproof. He kept Rose employed in
flinging sticks and stones for him to fetch, until the back entrance
to the mill was reached, where the little girls said good-bye to the
Vicar, and the dog followed his master home.

The next few weeks dragged somewhat for Mavis. But she went about with
a radiant light in her eyes and joy in her heart. Would her mother come
to her immediately on landing? she wondered. Oh, she would come as soon
as she possibly could, of that she was sure.

"I expect she wants me just as badly as I want her," she reflected,
"for we have been parted for nine months, and that's a long, long
time—though, of course, it might have been longer still."

So the May days slipped by, and it was mid-June when, one afternoon, on
returning from school, the little girls were met at the front door by
Mrs. John, who looked at Mavis with the kindest of smiles on her face.

"You have heard from mother!" cried Mavis, before her aunt had time to
speak. "Has the vessel arrived? Have you had a telegram or a letter?"

"Neither," Mrs. John answered; "but the vessel has arrived, and there's
some one in the parlour waiting for you, Mavis. Go to her, my dear."

Mavis needed no second bidding. She darted across the hall and rushed
into the parlour, where, the next moment, she found herself in her
mother's arms, and clasped to her mother's breast.

"Mother—mother, at last—at last!" was all she could say.

"Yes, at last, my darling," responded the dearly loved voice.

Then they kissed each other again and again, and Mavis saw that her
mother was looking remarkably well. And Mrs. Grey remarked that her
little daughter had grown, and was the plumper and rosier for her
sojourn in the country. It was a long while before Mavis could think
of any one but themselves. But at last, she inquired for Miss Dawson,
and heard that her mother had left her in her own home in London that
morning.

"I expect she's glad to be back again, isn't she, mother?" Mavis asked.

"Very glad, dear. You can imagine the joyful meeting between her and
her father. I shall never forget the thankfulness of his face when
he saw how bright and well she was looking. Poor man, I believe he
had made up his mind that he would never see her again. She does not
require a nurse now, but I have promised to stay with her for a few
months longer, and during that time, Mavis, I want you to remain at the
Mill House. Shall you mind?"

"No," Mavis answered, truthfully. "But you are not going right back to
London, mother, are you?" she asked, looking somewhat dismayed.

"No, dear. I have arranged to stay a few days with you."

What a happy few days those were to Mavis! She was allowed a holiday
from school, and showed her mother her favourite walks, and spent a
long afternoon with her in Oxford, where they visited T— College and
the haunts her father had loved. And oh how Mavis talked! There seemed
to be no end to all she had to tell about the household at the Mill
House, and the Vicar, and Richard Butt and his wife and baby, and
kind Mrs. Long, to all of which her mother listened with the greatest
interest and attention.

"Why, how many friends you have made!" Mrs. Grey said, on one occasion
when Mavis had been mentioning some of her schoolfellows. "You will be
sorry to have to say good-bye to them; but I do not know when that will
be, for I have not decided upon my future plans. I hope we shall never
be parted for such a long time again."

"Indeed I hope not," Mavis answered, fervently. "Shall we go back to
live at Miss Tompkins'?" she inquired.

"I don't know, dear," was the reply. "Perhaps we may—for a time."

Every one at the Mill House was very sorry when Mrs. Grey left and
returned to town. Her former visit had naturally been overshadowed
by the prospect of separation from her little daughter. But this had
indeed been a visit of unalloyed happiness, with no cloud of impending
sorrow to mar its joy.

After her mother's departure, Mavis went back to school with a very
contented heart, and in another month came the summer holidays. Her
feelings were very mixed when she learnt that it had been arranged
for her to stay at W— until the end of another term, for Mr. Dawson
had earnestly requested Mrs. Grey to remain with his daughter till
Christmas, and she had consented to do so. And she expressed her
sentiments to her aunt in the following words—

"I'm glad, and I'm sorry, Aunt Lizzie. Glad, because I can't bear the
thought of saying good-bye to you all, and sorry, because I do want
mother so much sometimes. Still, London's quite near; it isn't as
though mother was at the other end of the world, and time passes so
quickly. Christmas will soon be here."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I feel as though I must be dreaming," said Mavis, "but I suppose it's
really, really true. I can hardly believe it."

It was Christmas Eve, and a few days before the little girl had
been brought up to town by her uncle, who had delivered her to her
mother's care. To her surprise, however, she had not been taken to Miss
Tompkins' dingy lodging-house, but to Mr. Dawson's house in Camden
Square, where she had received a hearty welcome from Mr. Dawson and his
daughter.

She was with her mother and Miss Dawson now, in the pretty sitting-room
where, fifteen months previously, she had made the latter's
acquaintance. But there was nothing of the invalid about Miss Dawson
to-day; she looked in good health and spirits, and laughed heartily at
the sight of Mavis' bewildered countenance.

"What is it you can hardly believe, eh?" asked Mr. Dawson, as he
entered the room.

"I have been telling her that you mean to build and endow a
convalescent home in the country for girls, as a thanks-offering to God
for my recovery, father," Miss Dawson said, answering for Mavis, "and
that her mother is to be the matron, and she can scarcely credit it.
Still, I think she approves of our plan."

"Oh yes, yes!" cried Mavis. "It's just what I should wish to do if I
were you," she proceeded frankly, looking at Mr. Dawson with approval
in her glance, and then turning her soft hazel eyes meaningly upon his
daughter, "and you couldn't have a better matron than mother—"

"Mavis! My dear!" interrupted Mrs. Grey.

"It's quite true," declared Miss Dawson. Then she went on to explain to
Mavis that the home was to be within easy reach of London, and it was
to be a home of rest for sick working-girls, where they would have good
nursing.

"I think it's a beautiful plan," said Mavis, earnestly. She realized
that it meant permanent work for her mother, too; and turning to her
she inquired, "Shall I be able to live with you, mother?"

"Yes, dear, I hope so," Mrs. Grey answered, with a reassuring smile.

"Oh yes, of course," said Miss Dawson.

And the little girl's heart beat with joy.

She remained silent for a while after that, listening to the
conversation of her elders, and meditating on what wonderful news this
would be for them all at the Mill House. Then her mind travelled to Mr.
Moseley, and her face grew grave, as she thought of those two delicate
girls so dear to him, who had faded and died. But it brightened, as she
reflected how nice it must be to be rich, like Mr. Dawson, to be able
to help those not so well off as himself.

She was aroused from her reverie by Miss Dawson, who asked her to sing
a carol to them, and she willingly complied, singing the same she had
sung at the village concert at W— nearly a year before. Afterwards, she
gave them an account of the concert, and expressed the hope that she
would be a great singer some day.

"Why, Mavis, I never knew such an idea had entered your head!"
exclaimed her mother, greatly surprised.

"It never did, mother, until Mr. Moseley told me I had a great gift,
and that God expected me to use it for the benefit of others," the
little girl replied, seriously.

"Surely he was right!" said Miss Dawson.

And with that Mrs. Grey agreed.

Later in the evening, when Mavis went to the window and peeped out
to see what the weather was like, she felt an arm steal around her
shoulders, and Miss Dawson asked—

"What of the night? Are we going to have a fine Christmas?"

"I believe we are," Mavis answered. "The sky is clear and the stars are
very bright. Look!"

Miss Dawson did so, pressing her face close to the window-pane. Then
she suddenly kissed Mavis, and whispered—

"God bless you, dear, for all you've done for me. I carried the
remembrance of your sweet voice singing, 'The Lord is only my support,'
to Australia and back again, and it cheered and strengthened me
more than you will ever know. I wish you a happy Christmas, little
song-bird, and many, many more in the years to come."



                            THE END



[Illustration]



PRINTED BY
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
LONDON AND BECCLES.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SONG-BIRD ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


